D-Bot: Database Diagnosis System using Large Language Models
Xuanhe Zhou1, Guoliang Li1, Zhaoyan Sun1, Zhiyuan Liu1, Weize Chen1, Jianming Wu1
Jiesi Liu1, Ruohang Feng2, Guoyang Zeng3
1Tsinghua University 2Pigsty 3ModelBest
zhouxuan19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,liguoliang@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Database administrators (DBAs) play an important role in manag-
ing, maintaining and optimizing database systems. However, it is
hard and tedious for DBAs to manage a large number of databases
and give timely response (waiting for hours is intolerable in many
online cases). In addition, existing empirical methods only support
limited diagnosis scenarios, which are also labor-intensive to update
the diagnosis rules for database version updates. Recently large
language models (LLMs) have shown great potential in various
fields. Thus, we propose D-Bot, an LLM-based database diagnosis
system that can automatically acquire knowledge from diagnosis
documents, and generate reasonable and well-founded diagnosis
report (i.e., identifying the root causes and solutions) within ac-
ceptable time (e.g., under 10 minutes compared to hours by a DBA).
The techniques in D-Bot include (𝑖) offline knowledge extraction
from documents, (𝑖𝑖) automatic prompt generation (e.g., knowledge
matching, tool retrieval), (𝑖𝑖𝑖) root cause analysis using tree search
algorithm, and (𝑖𝑣) collaborative mechanism for complex anomalies
with multiple root causes. We verify D-Bot on real benchmarks
(including 539 anomalies of six typical applications), and the results
show that D-Bot can effectively analyze the root causes of unseen
anomalies and significantly outperforms traditional methods and
vanilla models like GPT-4.
PVLDB Artifact Availability:
The source code, data, technical report, and other artifacts have been made
available at https://github.com/TsinghuaDatabaseGroup/DB-GPT.
1
INTRODUCTION
Database diagnosis aims to detect, analyze, and resolve anomaly
events in database systems, thereby ensuring high data availability
and workload performance. However, database anomalies are re-
markably diverse, making it impossible to comprehensively cover
them with predefined rules [18]. As shown in Figure 1 (a), a data-
base vendor encountered over 900 anomaly events in three months,
most of which spanned various facets of database and system mod-
ules (e.g., slow query processing, locking mechanisms, improper
configurations). Furthermore, these modules exhibit complex cor-
relations with system metrics (e.g., high CPU usage may result
from concurrent commits or massive calculations). So it requires to
explore different reasoning strategies (e.g., investigating different
system views) before identifying the potential root causes.
As a result, database diagnosis is a challenging problem, where
“the devil is in the details” [12, 58]. Many companies rely on the
expertise of human database administrators (DBAs) to undertake
diagnosis tasks. Here we present a simplified example (Figure 1 (c)):
(1) Anomaly Notification. The database user notifies an anomaly,
e.g., “routine queries ... is 120% slower than the norm ...”; (2) Alert
Detection. Upon receiving the user’s notification, the DBA first
[CpuHigh alert] was 
triggered, and so I need 
to retrieve 5 metrics …
One query took up 
60% cpu time. It may 
be the bottleneck!
    Ok, I cannot find 
any more causes. Let’s 
write the report      
2.
3.
1.
4.
5.
(c) Diagnosis by Human
(a) Anomaly Events
(b) Comparison of Diagnosis Methods
 Routine workload 
gets extremely slow … 
    Great! I find the query 
can be optimized by 
adding one index …
Classifier 
(E.g., Decision Tree, MLP, RNN)
(d) Classiﬁer for Fixed Scenario
Fixed Numeric Metrics
inactive_memory
process_blocked
process_running
Selected Label
(Missing Index)
Fixed
Labeles
…
High
Generalizability
Low
High
High
Low
D-Bot
Most
Low
High
Classifier
Metric-Based
Low
Most
High
Human
Efficiency
Expense
Supported Anomaly
Criteria \ Method
123
1
1469304832
Normalization
   From the 5 CPU 
metrics, I find some 
abnormal events ..,
Figure 1: Database diagnosis is a complex problem mainly
handled by human expertise – (a) example root causes of
anomalies in a database vendor; (b) comparison of diagnosis
methods; (c) toy example of diagnosing by human DBA; (d)
example of diagnosing by machine learning classifier.
investigates the triggered alerts. For instance, the DBA discovers
a “CPU High” alert, indicating the total CPU usage exceeded 90%
for 2 minutes; (3) Metric Analysis. Next the DBA delves deeper to
explore more CPU-related metrics (e.g., the number of running
or blocked processes, the number of query calls). By analyzing
these metrics, the DBA concludes the issue was caused by some
resource-intensive queries. (4) Event Analysis. The DBA retrieves
the statistics of top-k slow queries (query templates) from database
views, and finds one query consumed nearly 60% of the CPU time.
(5) Optimization Advice. The DBA tries to optimize the problematic
query (e.g., index update, SQL rewrite) by experience or tools.
The above diagnosis process is inherently iterative (e.g., if the
DBA fails to find any abnormal queries, she may turn to investigate
I/O metrics). Besides, the DBA needs to write a diagnosis report1
to facilitate the user’s understanding, which includes information
like root causes together with the detailed diagnosis processes.
However, there exists a significant gap between the limited ca-
pabilities of human DBAs and the daunting diagnosis issues. Firstly,
training a human DBA demands an extensive amount of time, often
ranging from months to years, by understanding a large scale of
relevant documents (e.g., database tuning guides) and the necessity
for hands-on practice. Secondly, it is nearly impossible to employ
sufficient number of human DBAs to manage a vast array of data-
base instances (e.g. millions of instance on cloud databases). Thirdly,
a human DBA may not provide timely responses in urgent scenar-
ios, especially when dealing with correlated issues across multiple
1Over 100 diagnosis reports are available on the website http://dbgpt.dbmind.cn/.
arXiv:2312.01454v2  [cs.DB]  6 Dec 2023

database modules, which potentially lead to significant financial
losses. Thus, if typical anomalies can be automatically resolved, it
will relieve the burden of human DBAs and save resources.
Driven by this motivation, many database products are equipped
with semi-automatic diagnosis tools [20, 22, 29, 30, 32]. However,
they have several limitations. First, they are built by empirical
rules [12, 58] or small-scale ML models (e.g., classifiers [34]), which
have poor scenario understanding capability and cannot utilize the
diagnosis knowledge. Second, they cannot be flexibly generalized to
scenario changes. For empirical methods, it is tedious to manually
update and verify rules by newest versions of documents. And
learned methods (e.g., XGBoost [9], KNN [17]) require to redesign
the input metrics and labels, and retrain models for a new scenario
(Figure 1 (d)). Third, these methods have no inference ability as
human DBAs, such as recursively exploring system views based on
the initial analysis results to infer the root cause.
To this end, we aim to build an intelligent diagnosis system with
three main advantages. (1) Precise Diagnosis. First, our system can
utilize tools to gather scenario information (e.g., query analysis with
flame graph) or derive optimization advice (e.g., index selection),
which are necessary for real-world diagnosis. However, that is
hardly supported by traditional methods. Second, it can conduct
basic logical reasoning (i.e., making diagnosis plans). (2) Expense
and Time Saving. The system can relieve human DBAs from on-
call duties to some extent (e.g., resolving typical anomalies that rules
cannot support). (3) High Generalizability. The system exhibits
flexibility in analyzing unseen anomalies based on both the given
documents (e.g., new metrics, views, logs) and past experience.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) offer the
potential to achieve this goal, which have demonstrated superiority
in natural language understanding and programming [40, 42, 60, 63].
However, database diagnosis requires extensive domain-specific
skills and even the GPT-4 model cannot directly master the diagnosis
knowledge (lower than 50% accuracy). This poses three challenges.
(C1) How to enhance LLM’s understanding of the diagno-
sis problem? Despite pre-trained on extensive corpora, LLMs still
struggle in effectively diagnosing without proper prompting2 (e.g.,
unaware of the database knowledge). The challenges include (𝑖)
extracting useful knowledge from long documents (e.g., correla-
tions across chapters); (𝑖𝑖) matching with suitable knowledge by
the given context (e.g., detecting an alert of high node load); (𝑖𝑖𝑖)
retrieving tools that are potentially useful (e.g., database catalogs).
(C2) How to improve LLM’s diagnosis performance for single-
cause anomalies? With knowledge-and-tool prompt, LLM needs
to judiciously reason about the given anomalies. First, different from
many LLM tasks [13], database diagnosis is an interactive procedure
that generally requires to analyze for many times, while LLM has
the early stop problem [14]. Second, LLM has a “hallucination”
problem [44], and it is critical to design strategies that guide LLM
to derive in-depth and reasonable analysis.
(C3) How to enhance LLM’s diagnosis capability for multi-
cause anomalies? From our observation, within time budget, a
single LLM is hard to accurately analyze for complex anomalies
2Prompting is to add additional information into LLM input. Although LLMs can mem-
orize new knowledge with fine-tuning, it may forget previous knowledge or generate
inaccurate or mixed-up responses, which is unacceptable in database diagnosis.
(e.g., with multiple root causes and the critical metrics are in finer-
granularity). Therefore, it is vital to design an efficient diagnosis
mechanism where multiple LLMs can collaboratively tackle com-
plex database problems (e.g., with cross reviews) and improve both
the diagnosis accuracy and efficiency.
To tackle above challenges, we propose D-Bot, a database diag-
nosis system using large language models. First, we extract useful
knowledge chunks from documents (summary-tree based knowl-
edge extraction) and construct a hierarchy of tools with detailed
usage instructions, based on which we initialize the prompt tem-
plate for LLM diagnosis (see Figure 3). Second, according to the
prompt template, we generate new prompt by matching with most
relevant knowledge (key metric searching) and tools (fine-tuned
SentenceBert), which LLM can utilize to acquire monitoring and
optimization results for reasonable diagnosis. Third, we introduce a
tree-based search strategy that guides the LLM to reflect over past
diagnosis attempts and choose the most promising one, which sig-
nificantly improves the diagnosis performance. Lastly, for complex
anomalies (e.g., with multiple root causes), we propose a collabora-
tive diagnosis mechanism where multiple LLM experts can diagnose
in an asynchronous style (e.g., sharing analysis results, conducting
cross reviews) to resolve the given anomaly.
Contributions. We make the following contributions.
(1) We design an LLM-based database diagnosis framework to
achieve precise diagnosis (see Section 3).
(2) We propose a diagnosis prompt generation method that em-
powers LLM to perform diagnosis by (𝑖) matching with relevant
knowledge extracted from documents and (𝑖𝑖) retrieving tools with
a fine-tuned embedding model (see Sections 4 and 5).
(3) We propose a root cause analysis method that improves the di-
agnosis performance using tree-search-based algorithm that guides
LLM to conduct multi-step analysis (see Section 6).
(4) We propose a collaborative diagnosis mechanism to improve the
diagnosis efficiency, which involves multiple LLMs concurrently
analyzing issues by their domain knowledge (see Section 7).
(5) Our experimental results demonstrate that D-Bot can accurately
identify typical root causes within acceptable time (see Section 8).
2
PRELIMINARIES
2.1
Database Anomalies
Anomalies refer to the irregular or unexpected issues that neces-
sitate the diagnosis procedure [43]. Figure 2 show four typical
anomalies in databases.
(1) Slow Query Execution. The database experiences longer re-
sponse time than expectancy. For example, the slow query causes
significant increase in CPU usage (system load) and query duration
time, but the number of active processes remains low.
(2) Full Resource Usage. Some system resource is exhausted, pre-
venting it accepting new requests or even causing errors (e.g., insert
failures for running out of memory). For example, the high concur-
rency workload can not only cause great CPU and memory usage,
but significantly increases the number of active processes.
(3) Database Hanging. The database becomes unresponsive, which
is usually caused by long-running queries, deadlocks, or resource
contention. For example, abnormal waits in submitted transactions
2

Complex SQLs
Anomalies
& Root Causes
Workload Contention
…
Full Disk Space
Deadlocks
…
Long Running SQLs
Slow Query Execution
Full Resource Usage
Database Crashing
Database Hanging
…
…
Large Table Inserts
   Assigner: A critic alert occurs 
Load-1min: 175% beyond threshold
Overall Metrics
Finer-Grained Metric Analysis
Read / Write Rate
Memory_inactive_anon_bytes
Memory_dirty_bytes
 Expert: Identify large table insert
Database Activity Analysis
 Expert: Recommend some resolving solution 
INSERT INTO products VALUES
INSERT INTO products VALUES
Analysis Results
 We investigate whethe
We investigate dividing 
the table data …. 
Memory Relevant Metrics
System Average Load
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
admin
user1
admin
user1
The excessive memory usage 
may be caused by intensive 
inserts over a table.
Figure 2: Example of Database Diagnosis.
cause great CPU consumption like the full resource usage anomaly,
but it also involves frequent process interrupt and switching.
(4) Database Crashing. The database unexpectedly shuts down,
causing data to become inaccessible. A typical root cause is full
disk space, which leads to an inability to write new data or perform
necessary operations, ultimately resulting in database failure and
releasing the acquired resources.
2.2
Database Diagnosis
Database diagnosis refers to the process of analyzing and resolving
above anomalies (usually in the form of a series of alerts) that occur
within the database system. The primary objective of database diag-
nosis is to pinpoint the underlying root causes. Here we showcase
some example root causes in standalone databases3:
(1) Concurrency Workloads: Problems characterized by severe
workload contention, where multiple database operations compete
for system resources, leading to performance degradation.
(2) Query Operator Issues: Problems like inserting large tables,
fetching large volumes of data, and executing complex predicates,
which can strain the database system’s processing capabilities.
(3) Planning and Execution: Root causes in this category involve
abnormal planning times and prolonged database wait times, indi-
cating inefficiencies in query planning and execution processes.
(4) Data-specific Issues: Problems like data corruption and dead
tuples (rows that are no longer needed but remain in the physical
storage) may lead to performance problem.
(5) Database Schema and Settings: These issues related to database
schema (e.g., indexes) and configuration settings. Examples include
missing indexes and small shared buffer sizes, which can impact
query optimization and memory management.
(6) Harmful Background Tasks: Some database maintenance tasks,
like “vacuum” for storage space reclamation, can become problem-
atic when invoked too frequently (these tasks will compete system
resources with user queries).
Once the root causes are identified, a set of optimization actions
can be proposed to resolve these issues and restore normal database
operations. Here we showcase some optimization tools.
3Anomalies on the application or network side fall outside the scope of this work.
(1) Query Rewrite Tools. Since most databases are weak in logical
transformations [53] (e.g., complex predicate simplification), there
are external rewrite tools (e.g., around 120 rules in Calcite [5]) that
help to optimize slow queries.
(2) Knob Tuning Tools. Improper knob values may cause database
failures (e.g., exceeding the maximal connection number) or bad
performance (e.g., allocated working memory is too small). Thus,
there are tools that utilize rules to provide tuning suggestions [4, 51].
For instance, it increases the value of innodb_buffer_pool_size in
MySQL by 5% if the memory usage is lower than 60%.
(3) Index Tuning Tools. Similarly, there are index tuning rules
that generate potentially useful indexes [8, 25, 52, 54, 62], such as
creating composite index with columns in the same predicate.
Example 1. As shown in Figure 2, given an anomaly alert indi-
cating high memory usage, we first examine the system load (e.g.,
node_memory_total for memory usage) during the anomaly time.
The data confirms an abnormal memory utilization (over 90%). To
understand this, we further obtain the relevant memory metrics (e.g.,
node_memory_inactive_anon_bytes). Analysis of these metrics sug-
gests that the excessive memory usage may be caused by an intensive
workload that inserts data into a table. To address this, we investi-
gate if optimization strategies could help with reducing the memory
consumption (e.g., dividing table data into partitions).
2.3
Large Language Models
Next, we introduce the fundamental concepts of Large Language
Models (LLMs), including LLM architecture, LLM Prompting, and
LLM Fine-tuning, which are pivotal for harnessing their capabilities
in database diagnosis.
Transformer-Based LLMs. Existing LLMs mainly adopt the
Transformer architecture, distinguished by its attention mechanism
and feed-forward neural networks. Attention mechanism dynami-
cally weighs elements in the input, allowing the model to focus on
different parts of the text, i.e., the attention scores are computed
as 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑄, 𝐾,𝑉) = softmax
𝑄𝐾𝑇
√𝑑𝑘

𝑉, where 𝑄(queries), 𝐾
(keys), and 𝑉(values) represent different aspects of the text, and 𝑑𝑘
is the dimension of the keys. In addition, LLMs include feed-forward
3

Offline Preparation
Document
Tool Kit
Knowledge
Tool APIs
Anomaly
Alerts
New 
Messages
Database
Historical
Messages
Observation 2: {values}
Observation 3: Error
Observation 1: {values}
Observation 3: None
Thought 5: …
Action 5: Stop
Majority
Vote
Observation 4: {diagnosis}
Thought 4: …
Action 4: fetch_knowledge
Observation 6: {solution}
vote=1
vote=2
Expert Assigner
CPU
Memory
Workload
Query
Prompt Template
New
Messages
New Prompt
+
Historical Messages
1. CPU Expert
2. Workload Expert
+
I/O
Cross 
Review
Result
Refinement
Review Advice
Report Generation
CPU
Expert
…
Diagnosis Prompt Generation
Knowledge 
Retrieval
BM25
Tool
Matching Sentence Bert
Knowledge
Extraction
Thought 2: …
Action 2: metrics_api
Thought 3: …
Action 3: wrong api name
Thought 1: …
Action 1: cpu_usage_api 
Thought 6: …
Action 6: index_tuning_api
Document Learning
Tool Preparation
Expert Role
Assignment
API
Description
API
Registration
CPU
Expert
<Role> You are an expert skilled in CPU problem solving.
<Task> For anomalies, identify causes, suggest solutions.
<Steps> 1. First determine abnormal metrics; 2. Next …
Statistics
Alerts
- Expert Description: 
- The anomaly alerts are {Anomaly Info}
- In this step, you can use the following tools:  {Tool APIs}
- The matched knowledge is:  {Knowledge}
============================================
(Demonstration Examples of available tool usage)
Tool Hierarchy
Tools
Reflection
Monitoring Tools
Optimization Tools
Server Tools
Database Tools
Configuration Tools
Query Tools
vmstat
iostat
audit
warm-up knob index
hint rewrite
kcache
…
…
Tree-Search Based Diagnosis
Collaborative Diagnosis Mechanism
Diagnosis
Optimize query with 
indexing, e.g., tbl#id…
Cross 
Review
Result
Refinement
Diagnosis
Since query is solved, 
try other knowledge …
Cross 
Review
Result
Refinement
Diagnosis
Since query is solved, 
I can stop early …
Observation
Thought
Review Advice
Thought
Figure 3: Database Diagnosis in D-Bot.
neural networks in each layer, which apply position-wise linear
transformations to the output of the attention layer. This combi-
nation of attention and feed-forward networks facilitate accurate
predictions of subsequent text elements.
LLM Prompting. To provide LLM with specific instructions for
guiding their response generation, we can prepend or append a
prompt 𝑃to the input𝑋to create a new input, denoted as𝑋′ = 𝑃⊕𝑋
or 𝑋′ = 𝑋⊕𝑃. LLM then generates the output text based on this
modified input. Note (𝑖) prompting does not require any additional
updates to the model parameters and (𝑖𝑖) prompts can be manually
crafted or automatically learned from data [63].
LLM Fine-tuning involves adjusting the model parameters on a
small and task-specific dataset (e.g., thousands of samples). Initially,
the model parameters, denoted as 𝜃, are inherited from the pre-
training phase. Fine-tuning aims to minimize the loss function L,
tailored to the specific task (e.g., classification or regression), over
the task-specific dataset D. It is represented as 𝜃new = 𝜃old −𝛼·
∇L(𝜃old; D), where a small learning rate 𝛼is often used to ensure
gradual parameter updates [59].
We rely on LLM prompting to guide close-sourced LLMs like
GPT-4 to diagnose (see Section 5), and utilize LLM fine-tuning to
prepare localized LLMs (see Section 8.5).
3
THE OVERVIEW OF D-BOT
Architecture. As shown in Figure 4, we first illustrate the overall
architecture of D-Bot. (1) Anomaly Monitor continuously monitors
the status of databases using alert rules. (2) When a database turns
to abnormal status, Anomaly Monitor sends the triggered alerts to
Anomaly Profiler. (3) Anomaly Profiler generates an anomaly descrip-
tion based on both the alerts and basic database information (e.g.,
query statistics during the time period of the alerts). (4) Database
Diagnosis empowers one or multiple LLM experts to collaboratively
generate an analysis report for the anomaly.
Next, we present the challenges and techniques in the database
diagnosis component4 (see Figure 3).
4This paper is an extension of the vision [61]
…
Alert
Module
Webhook
Server
…
Status
…
Alerts
Report/
Solution
Deploy
Anomaly Monitor
Alert Repository
Query Logs
Conﬁg
Knowledge
Knowledge
Retrieval
Anomaly
Description
Database
Diagnosis
Monitoring
Tools
Optimization
Tools
Tool
Calling
Report/ 
Solution
Anomaly Proﬁler
IoT
Financial
Telecom
Metrics
Figure 4: D-Bot Architecture.
(1) Offline Preparation. Offline Preparation equips D-Bot with
the knowledge and tools necessary for database diagnosis.
(𝑖) Document Learning: As diagnosis documents are not com-
monly found in the pre-training corpus and document sections have
relations like cross-reference, we conduct knowledge extraction
that builds summary trees to represent the document structures and
extract knowledge chunks from the trees (e.g., traversing parent-
child nodes and nodes with similar summaries).
(𝑖𝑖) Tool Preparation: This step configures the diagnosis tools,
such as providing API descriptions (explaining what API does, how
it’s used, and what kind of data it returns) and registering APIs into
the system so they can be used by LLM during diagnosis.
We cluster all the extracted knowledge chunks (Figure 6) and,
for each cluster, we generate a prompt template (e.g., expert role,
task description, basic diagnosis steps, available tools) to represent
the characters of an LLM expert. For example, one LLM expert is in
charge of analyzing CPU problems (knowledge) and can leverage
tools like cpu_usage_api and index_tuning_api. In this way, each
LLM expert handles a specific area of database problems.
(2) Diagnosis Prompt Generation. With all necessary knowl-
edge and tools readily available, Diagnosis Prompt Generation is
responsible for creating context-aware prompts that guide the diag-
nosis process. Following the prompt template, each new prompt in
the actual diagnosis requires three essential types of information:
4

1
Documents
1.1
 
   
 \
1.1.1
1.2 
   
1.3
 
  
1.1.2
1.3.1
…
  Summary
Summarize the key aspects of the given 
document text: (1) The workﬂow and the 
characteristic; (2) The application scenarios...
Prompt
   Chapter Text
Reference
Chapter Splitting
Summary Generation
Knowledge Extraction
Similar Node
Matching
Knowledge
Decoding
Matched Nodes
Chapter Text
Document Blocks
Summary Tree (ST)
Tree Initialization
Knowledge
Chunks
Figure 5: Document Learning.
(𝑖) Anomaly Description. The triggered alerts, including the oc-
curring time, a summary of anomaly, severity level (e.g., warning
or critical), additional features (e.g., anomaly status like “resolved”).
(𝑖𝑖) Tools. Due to the variety of tools for different database usage
(e.g., monitoring, indexing, query rewrite, query hint), we fine-tune
a pre-trained Sentence-BERT model [45] to match to the current
context (e.g., when LLM is unaware of which metrics is abnormal)
with relevant tools (e.g., the fetch_abnormal_metrics API).
(𝑖𝑖𝑖) Knowledge Chunks that instruct LLM on how to diagnose
with the obtained abnormal metrics. We identify the most relevant
knowledge chunks with keyword search methods (e.g., BM25).
(𝑖𝑖𝑣) Historical Messages containing valuable information, such
as the past tool calling results, which are crucial for tree-search-
based diagnosis (e.g., making decisions by previous steps).
(3) Tree-Search Based Diagnosis. Tree-Search Based Diagno-
sis aims to identify the potential root causes and solutions using
the generated prompt (calling tools or analyzing by following the
knowledge). For database diagnosis, LLM encounters challenges
like hallucination and unstable LLM responses (e.g., incorrect API
requests, overly general analysis) that can cause diagnosis failures.
To solve this problem, we employ the tree of thought strategy, where
LLM explores multiple possible reasoning chains and selects the
most beneficial chain to explore (based on both the LLM’s votes
and selection frequency). Additionally, through the reflection mech-
anism, LLM can backtrack to previous steps if the current step fails
to detect useful information, which significantly increases the like-
lihood of arriving at reasonable diagnosis results.
(4) Collaborative Diagnosis Mechanism. Since the cost of Tree-
Search Based Diagnosis increases significantly with the number of
equipped knowledge and tools, Collaborative Diagnosis Mechanism
aims to improve the diagnosis performance by leveraging multiple
LLM experts. Given an anomaly, we begin by selecting relevant
experts based on the triggered alerts and anomaly complexity. Next,
the selected experts separately analyze (Tree-Search Based Diagno-
sis) with a more focused set of tools and knowledge chunks. Here we
adopt an asynchronous strategy: the selected experts share inter-
mediate diagnosis results during diagnosis, facilitating real-time
information exchange and reducing the redundant analysis (e.g.,
the same query issues). After diagnosis, these experts conduct cross-
review (e.g., identifying overly general root causes), based on which
they iteratively refine the analysis results and ultimately generate
a comprehensive report under specific template (e.g., including the
background, root causes, solutions, and detailed steps).
4
OFFLINE PREPARATION
In this section, we explain how to prepare necessary knowledge
and tools for LLM diagnosis.
4.1
Document Learning
We first decide the knowledge format that is suitable to use in LLM
prompting. Next, we introduce the extraction method to obtain such
knowledge chunks from given documents. Finally, we showcase
the obtained knowledge chunks and their clustering results.
4.1.1
Knowledge Format. Similarly to the diagnosis evidence in
Figure 2, given some documents, the desired knowledge chunk is
composed of four parts: (i) “Name” helps LLM to understand the
overall function; (ii) “Content” explains how the root cause can
impact the database performance (e.g., performance degradation
due to an excessive number of dead tuples); (iii) “Metrics” is a list
of involved metric names, used for knowledge matching in prompt
generation (Section 5.1); (iv) “Steps” provides the detailed procedure
of analyzing with the relevant metrics. This allows the LLM to
imitate and perform step-by-step analysis.
4.1.2
Knowledge Extraction. Next we explain how to extract such
knowledge from documents. In database diagnosis, the relevant
documents have two characters, i.e., (𝑖) most documents are of
long context involved diversified aspects (e.g., both resource and
configuration issues are discussed in maintenance guide) and (𝑖𝑖)
some paragraphs are correlated with each other. For example, the
concept of “bloat-table” appearing in “many_dead_tuples” (like
Chapter 3.2) is explained in another section (like Chapter 1.1.3).
Although there are already some long-context LLMs [2] that
support long documents as input, they cannot ensure the qual-
ity of answered knowledge (e.g., missing or making up important
details [27, 56]). Thus, we propose a deterministic knowledge ex-
traction algorithm in three steps.
Step1: Chapter Splitting. Instead of directly splitting documents
into fixed-length segments, we divide them based on the chapter
structures and their content (e.g., applications split by keywords
like “tenant examples”). If a block exceeds the maximum block
size (e.g., 4k tokens) that the LLM can handle, we further divide it
recursively into smaller blocks.
Step2: Summary Tree Construction. Next, based on the chapter
relations, we initialize a tree structure, where the root node is the
document title and other nodes denote split document blocks. For
each node 𝑖, its child node denotes a subsection of chapter 𝑖and
node 𝑖includes two parts: (1) the content of chapter 𝑖and (2) the
summary of chapter 𝑖, which is created by feeding the content into
LLM with a summarization prompt, i.e., 𝑝𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑒= Summarize
the provided chunk briefly · · · Your summary will serve as an index
for others to find technical details related to database maintenance
· · · Pay attention to examples even if the chunks cover other topics.
5

Figure 6: Clustering results of extracted knowledge.
The generated summary acts as a textual index of the node 𝑖,
enabling the matching of blocks with similar content or relations
like cross references.
Step3: Knowledge Extraction. After generating the summary tree,
LLM parses each document block 𝑖(with content from both node 𝑖
and its child nodes) and compares it with the summaries of other
blocks having similar content, which is guided by the extraction
prompt, i.e., 𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡= “Given a chunk summary, extract diagnosis
experience from the chunk. If uncertain, explore diagnosis experience
in chunks from child nodes or chunks with similar summaries.”
This way, knowledge that correlates with the key points from
the summaries are detected. For each detected knowledge 𝐶𝑖, we
decide whether to keep 𝐶𝑖in a hybrid manner. Specifically, if LLM
indicates a low likelihood that 𝐶𝑖is redundant (compared with
existing knowledge), we will incorporate it. Otherwise, we will
conduct a manual examination of 𝐶𝑖, where 𝐶𝑖can be kept if we
discover any new insights, even though 𝐶𝑖has significant overlap
with some existing knowledge. In this way, we can ensure the
inclusion of most diagnosis knowledge and reduce the potential for
redundant information.
4.1.3
Clustering Results of Extracted Knowledge. We showcase 188
knowledge chunks extracted from 81 pages of documents, including
the general diagnosis guides, cases, and detailed reports5.
To derive insights from this diverse set of knowledge chunks, we
(𝑖) convert the chunks into numerical vectors using a pre-trained
embedding model (e.g., Ada-002 [2]); and (𝑖𝑖) apply the DBSCAN
algorithm [23] to group knowledge chunks by the similarity of their
text embeddings; and (𝑖𝑖𝑖) reduce the dimensionality of the text
embeddings (to three dimensions) using Principal Component Anal-
ysis (PCA). In this way, we can visualize the knowledge extraction
results in Figure 6, which illustrates that the knowledge distribution
largely aligns with the types of root causes (Section 2.2). Here, we
highlight some knowledge topics. (1) Workloads include (𝑖) diag-
nosing workload contention issues (e.g., excessive connections),
(𝑖𝑖) analyzing the impact of database wait events, (𝑖𝑖𝑖) addressing
5github.com/TsinghuaDatabaseGroup/DB-GPT/tree/main/doc2knowledge/docs
abnormal persistent events, (𝑖𝑣) tackling long/short-term perfor-
mance fluctuations. (2) Query Operators include (𝑖) analyzing inac-
curate operator costs that influence query plans, (𝑖𝑖) identifying
slow operators (e.g., poor joins, aggregations, index filtering), (𝑖𝑖𝑖)
analyzing the impact of abnormal SQL structures. (3) Index Issues
include (𝑖) identifying unused or redundant indexes, (𝑖𝑖) addressing
the performance impact of too many indexes in a table, especially
on insert and update operations, (𝑖𝑖𝑖) detecting missing indexes,
and (𝑖𝑣) analyzing why an index was used in a query plan (e.g.,
index invalidation, implicit type conversion).
It is evident that a knowledge chunk can be relevant to multiple
topics (e.g., slow queries may get involved in both CPU and operator
analysis). Thus, effective utilization and communication of these
knowledge chunks (e.g., experts from different topics) are vital for
the following diagnosis.
4.2
Tool Preparation
Apart from knowledge, human DBAs need to frequently interact
with monitoring and optimization tools (e.g., database views, system
commands, index tuning tools). To facilitate effective LLM diagnosis,
it’s essential to ensure LLM understand the complex API functions
within available tools.
First, we establish a structured hierarchy to classify and orga-
nize “categories-tools-APIs”, where “APIs” represent the specific
functions of a tool. For example, an index selection tool would
be categorized under “optimization”, with “configuration tool” as
its tool type, and “heuristic_index_selection” as an example API
(Figure 3). This hierarchy aids in organizing and understanding the
diverse range of database tools.
Second, for each tool function, we provide a detailed utiliza-
tion specification (in the form of function comment). This includes
the function’s explanation, its parameters, and relevant use cases
(for Section 5.2). For instance, the function explanation for “heuris-
tic_index_selection” could be “Automatically select cost-reduction
indexes based on query patterns and workload. Arguments include
query frequency, data volume, index storage constraints, ...”.
Finally, we dynamically register tool functions by iterating
through APIs in the given tool modules, obtaining each API’s func-
tion names along with their utilization specifications.
5
DIAGNOSIS PROMPT GENERATION
Next we explain how to automatically generate diagnosis prompts
by matching with the extracted knowledge and tools.
5.1
Knowledge Retrieval
Apart from knowledge that offers general diagnosis processes (in-
cluded in the prompt template), most knowledge chunks are only
useful under specific context. such as the analysis of abnormal CPU
metrics (Figure 7). Thus, for a given context (e.g., with 5 abnormal
CPU metrics), we adopt the approximate algorithm BM25 [47] to
rank the most relevant knowledge chunks. Specifically, the BM25
algorithm ranks a set of knowledge chunks based on their “metrics”
attribute, computed as:
Score(𝐷,𝑄) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
IDF(𝑞𝑖) ·
𝑓(𝑞𝑖, 𝐷) · (𝑘1 + 1)
𝑓(𝑞𝑖, 𝐷) + 𝑘1 · (1 −𝑏+ 𝑏·
|𝐷|
avgDL)
(1)
6

Anomaly: The node’s CPU usage was extremely high. Please 
investigate the cause to prevent such incidents.
Thought: Investigate metrics like node_procs_running …
Action:  obtain_metric_values
Arguments: {metrics: [“node_procs_running”, …], time: ..}
Thought: Knowledge indicates inefﬁcient query execution …
Action:  optimize_index_selection
Arguments: {start_time: …, end_time: …, db_name: …}
Thought: The anomaly is caused by high CPU usage …
Action:  Finish
Observation1: The metrics 
contain abnormal pattern: …
Observation2: The service is 
unavailable
Matched Knowledge: 
cpu_resource_contention
Diagnosis Failure
Early
Stop
Early
Stop
Next
Output 2
Output 1
Result 1
Result 2
LLM Inference
Matching
LLM Inference
(Step 1)
(Step 2)
Figure 7: Example multi-step diagnosis by LLM.
where 𝐷is a knowledge block, 𝑄is a set of abnormal metrics
(by anomaly detection algorithms like KS-Test [6]), 𝑓(𝑞𝑖, 𝐷) is the
frequency of the metric 𝑞𝑖in 𝐷, avgDL is the average knowledge
block length, 𝑘1 and 𝑏are free hyper-parameters. IDF(𝑞𝑖) is the
inverse document frequency of the metric 𝑞𝑖, computed as:
IDF(𝑞𝑖) = ln
 𝑁−𝑛(𝑞𝑖) + 0.5
𝑛(𝑞𝑖) + 0.5
+ 1

(2)
where 𝑁is the total number of extracted knowledge chunks, and
𝑛(𝑞𝑖) is the number of documents containing metric 𝑞𝑖.
The advantage of this approach is that we can match knowledge
chunks even when the names or meanings of the metrics involved
are not exactly the same and easily apply the extract knowledge
across different monitoring tools or even systems.
5.2
Tool Matching
Different from matching knowledge chunks with abnormal metrics,
database tools involve complex APIs and the API names may not
be directly relevant to the context (e.g., APIs like sort_remove for
slow queries). In this way, the BM25 algorithm may have relatively
high error rates. Thus, we propose to fine-tune a more powerful
pre-trained Sentence-BERT model [46] that accurately matches
suitable tools for an diagnosis context. This procedure includes two
main steps, i.e., model fine-tuning and tool matching.
• Sentence-BERT Fine-tuning: Let 𝑆= {𝑠1,𝑠2, . . . ,𝑠𝑛} denote the
set of diagnosis contexts, and 𝑇= {𝑡1,𝑡2, . . . ,𝑡𝑚} denote the set of
database tools. We aim to fine-tune a pre-trained Sentence-BERT
model to comprehend the relational context between anomalies and
database tools. The fine-tuning process is performed with a labeled
dataset 𝐷= {(𝑠𝑖,𝑡𝑗,𝑦𝑖𝑗)}𝑛,𝑚
𝑖=1,𝑗=1, where 𝑦𝑖𝑗is the label indicating
the relevance of tool 𝑡𝑗for a diagnosis context 𝑠𝑖. The objective
function is computed by cross-entropy loss:
L = −
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑚
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑦𝑖𝑗log(𝑝𝑖𝑗) + (1 −𝑦𝑖𝑗) log(1 −𝑝𝑖𝑗),
(3)
where 𝑝𝑖𝑗is the predicted probability that tool 𝑡𝑗is relevant for
anomaly 𝑠𝑖, obtained by passing the concatenated embeddings of 𝑠𝑖
and 𝑡𝑗through a sigmoid function.
• Suitable Tool Matching: After fine-tuning, the model is em-
ployed to match the appropriate database tools for a new diagnosis
context 𝑠. The matching score between diagnosis context 𝑠and
database tool 𝑡𝑗is computed as the cosine similarity between their
embeddings, i.e.,
sim(𝑠,𝑡𝑗) =
emb(𝑠) · emb(𝑡𝑗)
||emb(𝑠)||2||emb(𝑡𝑗)||2
,
(4)
where emb(.) denotes the embedding function of the fine-tuned
Sentence-BERT model. The set of recommended database tools ˆ𝑇
for diagnosis context 𝑠is obtained by selecting the top-𝑘tools with
the highest matching scores:
ˆ𝑇= arg top𝑘{sim(𝑠,𝑡𝑗)}𝑚
𝑗=1.
(5)
Finally, the selected top-𝑘tools are integrated into the prompt,
including their names, function descriptions, and argument lists,
based on which LLMs can generate calling requests and obtain tool
execution results to enhance root cause diagnosis.
6
TREE SEARCH FOR LLM DIAGNOSIS
As shown in Figure 7, LLMs easily make mistakes like (𝑖) generating
the wrong tool calling request or receiving request failures (e.g.,
temporarily service unavailable) and (𝑖𝑖) stopping diagnosis early
without carefully reflecting over the proposed root causes. To solve
these problems, we propose to tree-search based algorithm that can
guide LLM to go back to previous actions if the current action fails
or no valuable root causes can be found (Algorithm 1).
Step1: Tree Initialization. We initialize a tree structure where
each node represents an action (e.g. tool calling or analysis based
on matched knowledge), and the edges represent the flow from one
action to another.
Step2: Simulate Execution. This step kicks off the execution
of simulations starting from the root node to a leaf node (i.e., the
end of a complete diagnosis). It involves selecting nodes based on
specific standard (e.g., detected abnormal metrics). Here we utilize
the UCT (Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees) function [36]
to decide on the traversal path, i.e., 𝑈𝐶𝑇(𝑛) = 𝑊(𝑛)
𝑁(𝑛) +𝐶
√︃
2 ln 𝑁(𝑝)
𝑁(𝑛)
, where 𝑊(𝑛) is the number of wins after the 𝑛-th move, 𝑁(𝑛) is
the= number of simulations after the 𝑛-th move, 𝑁(𝑝) is the total
number of simulations for parent node, and 𝐶is the exploration
hyper-parameter. During the traversal, nodes with the highest UCT
values are selected.
Within the UCT function, 𝑊(𝑛) is computed by the voting of
several evaluation LLMs (e.g., three). For each leaf nodes, the LLMs
are presented with the scenario context and historical actions lead-
ing to the node. Based on this information, they cast votes in favor
of the promising leaf nodes (e.g., based on the number and accuracy
of involved root causes). The node receiving the highest number of
votes (𝑊(𝑛)) is determined as the most favorable path.
7

Algorithm 1: Tree-Search Based Diagnosis
Data: 𝑇: Set of tool APIs; 𝐾: Set of knowledge chunks
(1) Initialize tree;
(2) while threshold time not reached do
(3)
foreach node in tree do
(4)
Calculate 𝑈𝐶𝑇for node ;
(5)
Select node with highest 𝑈𝐶𝑇;
(6)
Extend child nodes using tool API 𝑡∈𝑇or chunk 𝑘∈𝐾;
(7)
foreach action in extended nodes do
(8)
Reflect on potential benefits of the action with LLM;
(9)
Append reflection to the node ;
(10)
if action adds no info then
(11)
Prune node ;
(12) return Results of leaf node with most votes;
Step3: Existing Node Reflection. For each node in the path from
the root node to the selected node, we depend on LLM to rethink
the benefits of taking the action (e.g., prompting with “make some
reflection to inherit to later trails”), which are appended to the prompt
of child node. It can not only improve the analysis quality of next
steps. Besides, if LLM decides there is no useful information, the
node will be marked with “pruned” so as to enhance the diagnosis
efficiency.
Step4: Terminal Condition. If LLM cannot find any more root
causes (leaf nodes) for a threshold time (e.g., 20 turns), the algorithm
ends by outputting the root causes and solutions of the best node.
7
COLLABORATIVE DIAGNOSIS FOR
COMPLEX ANOMALIES
With tool leaning and tree search algorithm, the diagnosis accuracy
of single LLM can be greatly improved. Nevertheless, we find single
LLMs have trouble in resolving complex anomalies with multiple
root causes (e.g., looping over limited causes and struggling to
identify additional ones). To address this, we propose a collaborative
mechanism where multiple LLMs, each equipped with tools and tree
search algorithms, work collectively to tackle complex cases [1].
Step1: Expert Preparation. We initialize 7 LLM experts by the
knowledge clustering results (Section 4). Each expert is equipped
with different knowledge and necessary tools in the prompt.
Step2: Expert Assignment. Next, to avoid resource waste and
improve diagnosis efficiency, we assign appropriate experts to di-
agnose. That is, given an anomaly, we first generate a description
of the anomaly (e.g., time period, alert types, severity level). Next,
based on the anomaly description, Expert Assigner utilizes an LLM
(e.g., GPT-4) to select a set of most relevant experts. For example,
CPU Expert for the Load_High alert and Memory Expert for the
Out_of_Memory alert. Note we adopt LLM rather than rules, which
is more flexible to plugin new alert rules or expert roles.
Step3: Asynchronous Diagnosis. The chosen experts simul-
taneously diagnose (Section 6). Despite utilizing a common LLM,
each expert is uniquely equipped with role-specific settings and
domain knowledge. We enhance the diagnosis process with an asyn-
chronous communication mechanism [24], which is built on the
publish-subscribe model. That is, experts “publish” their findings or
updates, which are then automatically “delivered” to other experts
who have “subscribed” to these specific types of updates (e.g., all
the reset selected experts).
This mechanism allows for the efficient and non-blocking infor-
mation exchange (e.g., metric analysis, tool outputs, results) among
LLM experts. For instance, the CPU Expert might post a finding
about abnormal CPU load patterns of slow queries, triggering an
event-driven notification to other experts. This event-driven ap-
proach enables the memory expert to promptly detect memory
swap activities potentially caused by these slow queries.
Step4: Cross Review. Although the experts own different do-
main knowledge (e.g., os_resource_contention for CPU Expert and
swap_usage_analysis for Memory Expert), some common analysis
evidence (e.g., operator types, configuration settings) of these ex-
perts may inspire each other. Thus, after obtaining the diagnosis
results of all the experts, we conduct cross review and there are
three main sub-steps:
• Diagnosis Summary. For an expert, it requires dozens of itera-
tions to provide in-depth analysis, resulting in extensive analysis
records. Therefore, it is crucial to effectively summarize the key
information from these records. To achieve this, we progressively
summarize the lines of a record (𝑟𝑡), which includes inputs for spe-
cific tools and the corresponding results, or relevant knowledge.
Specifically, for each step 𝑡, we maintain a running summary (𝑠𝑡−1),
encapsulating previous actions and outcomes. Upon generating the
new record 𝑟𝑡, an LLM is assigned to incorporate the main idea of 𝑟𝑡
into 𝑠𝑡−1, leading to the new summary, 𝑠𝑡. For a clearer explanation,
consider the following example:
[Current summary 𝑠𝑡−1]
- I know the start and end time of the anomaly.
[New Record 𝑟𝑡]
Thought: Now that I have the start and end time of the
anomaly, I need to diagnose the causes of the anomaly
Action: is_abnormal_metric
Action
Input:
{“start_time”:
1684600070,
“end_time”:
1684600074, “metric_name”: “cpu_usage”}
Observation: “The metric is abnormal”
[New summary 𝑠𝑡]
- I know the start and end time of the anomaly.
- I searched for is_abnormal_metric, and I now know that the
CPU usage is abnormal.
• Review Advice. Next, each expert gives the improvement advice
based on the diagnosis results and summarized procedures of other
experts. The review prompt is written like 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑒𝑤= “Please review
the above diagnosis results, and give necessary advice to correct the
incorrect analysis or unclear results.”
• Diagnosis Refinement. After the cross-review, each expert reeval-
uates their initial diagnosis and even conducts more inferences (e.g.,
calling tools to analyze more relevant metrics or settings). In this
way, they can incorporate additional evidence, revising hypotheses,
or overlooked aspects in the diagnosis results.
Step5: Report Generation. Based on both the refined diagno-
sis results, Expert Assigner generate detailed diagnosis report for
8

Table 1: Micro Benchmark Statistics. The applications cover ten typical root causes (introduced in Section 2.2).
Application
Sync
Commits
Many
Inserts
High
Updates
Many
Deletes
Index
Missing
Redundant
Indexes
Large
Data Insert
Large
Data Fetch
Poor
Join
Correlated
Subquery
Cases
Internet of Things
✓
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
83
E-Commerce
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
211
Financial
✓
✓
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
31
Business Intel.
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
20
File Sharing
×
✓
✓
×
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
47
Social Meida
✓
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
✓
147
the given anomaly, including (𝑖) title (summary of the anomaly);
(𝑖𝑖) anomaly date; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) detailed anomaly description (from alerts);
(𝑖𝑣) root causes (within diagnosis results); (𝑖𝑣) solutions (within
diagnosis results); (𝑣) summarized diagnosis process.
8
EXPERIMENT RESULTS
With the carefully prepared micro benchmark, we conduct extensive
experiments to evaluate the proposed techniques in D-Bot
8.1
Environment Setup
Database. We implement D-Bot in PostgreSQL 12.5, using (𝑖) the
pg_stat_statements plugin for tracking frequent queries, and (𝑖𝑖)
the hypopg plugin for creating hypothetical indexes [3].
LLMs. We support prompt-based LLMs including GPT-4-0613 and
gpt-3.5-turbo-16k [2], where the temperature parameter is set to 0 in
favor of reproduction. Fine-tuned LLMs include Llama 2, CodeLlama
and Baichuan 2.
Evaluated Methods. The evaluated methods include: (1) Hu-
manDBA. A human DBA with 2 years working experience analyze
the root causes. (2) D-Bot (GPT-4) is the version of D-Bot driven
by GPT-4-0613 (within a limit of 8,192 tokens for each inference),
which serves as 8 expert roles with different domain knowledge
(Section 4.1.3). (3) D-Bot (GPT-3.5) is the version of D-Bot powered
by the GPT-3.5 model. In case of exceeding the token limits, we use
gpt-3.5-turbo-16k (a maximum of 16,385 tokens). (4) DNN utilizes
a shallow neural network (with two layers and ReLU activation)
to classify the input abnormal metric vectors into one or multiple
root causes [21]. (5) DecisionTree employs the decision tree algo-
rithmto label the root causes for the input metric values [49]. (6)
GPT-4 model that does not utilize the techniques in D-Bot, which
(𝑖) inputs suitable task description and demonstration examples
and (𝑖𝑖) outputs the root causes. (7) GPT-3.5. Similarly, we test the
performance of GPT-3.5 model without techniques in D-Bot.
Ablation Methods. We offer variants of D-Bot for ablation anal-
ysis: (1) NoKnowledge is D-Bot (GPT-4) that does not utilize the
extracted knowledge. (2) NoTreeSearch is D-Bot (GPT-4) that adopts
the chain-of-thought reasoning (e.g., LangChain [7]). (3) SingleLLM
is D-Bot (GPT-4) that utilizes single LLM to diagnose.
8.2
Micro Diagnosis Benchmark
Based on works like [20, 31], we design a micro benchmark that
offers (𝑖) diversified anomaly scenarios (e.g., different applications,
workloads, and anomaly types), (𝑖𝑖) executable scripts, (𝑖𝑖𝑖) clear
scenario descriptions (e.g., “In a database of an e-commerce platform,
91 users simultaneously perform searches · · · ”), together with (𝑖𝑣)
evaluation metrics that can reflect the diagnosis performance.
Anomaly Cases. As shown in Table 1, we include a diverse set
of simulated applications: (𝑖) Internet of Things (IoT) applications
mainly have the “highly commits” anomalies, caused by handling
a lot of incoming data from sensors; (𝑖𝑖) E-commerce applications
exhibit multiple anomalies (e.g., “highly updates” and “large data
fetch”), possibly caused by concurrent updates to product databases
and high volume data retrievals during sales; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) Financial applica-
tions involve anomalies like “poor joins”, suggesting complex trans-
actional operations; (𝑖𝑣) Business Intelligence applications mainly
involve “redundant index” and “missing index” anomalies, empha-
sizing the importance of optimizing data access paths; (𝑣) File Shar-
ing applications (e.g., Dropbox, Google Drive) often encounter the
“large data fetch” anomaly, caused by data retrievals of multimedia
content. (𝑣𝑖) Social Media applications (e.g., MySQL originally for
Twitter) predominantly face the “highly commits” anomaly when
read and write data quickly. Different from IoT, they also involve
complex queries that cause the “correlated subquery” anomaly.
Evaluation Metrics. We adopt two metrics for practical diagnosis
evaluation. First, similar to works like [28, 34], we use Result Accu-
racy (Acc) to quantify the precision of recommended root causes,
i.e.,
Acc =
( 𝐴𝑐−𝜎·𝐴𝑤
𝐴𝑎
,
if 𝐴𝑎> 0 ∧𝐴𝑐≥𝜎· 𝐴𝑤
0,
otherwise
where 𝐴𝑐denotes the number of correct causes, 𝐴𝑎denotes the
total number of causes, 𝐴𝑤denotes the number of wrongly detected
causes, and 𝜎is a hyper-parameter with 0.1 as the default value,
because we identify redundant causes is less harmful than missing
causes and restrict to at most 4 root causes for an anomaly.
Second, Human Evaluated Accuracy (HEval) shares the same
equation as Acc. However, 𝐴′𝑐in HEval denotes number of causes
that (𝑖) are correctly detected and (𝑖𝑖) the analysis process also
makes sense (human evaluation). HEval is vital to provide reliable
diagnosis for online usage.
8.3
Performance Comparison
We compare D-Bot with three types of baselines, including manual
diagnosis (HumanDBA), existing machine learning methods (DNN,
DecisionTree), and origin LLMs (GPT-4, GPT-3.5) across six applica-
tions. For each application, we sample ten testing anomalies from
the micro benchmark. The remaining anomalies are used as the
training samples for DNN, DecisionTree. The performance results
are illustrated in Figures 8-9.
9

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
0.80.77
0.7
0.44
0.24
0.36
0.23
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
1.0
0.73
0.60.60
0.30
0.46
0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
1.0
0.77
0.3
0.60
0.18
0.260.21
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
0.8
0.66
0.3
0.21
0.45
0.12
0.26
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
0.8
0.73
0.50.41
0.58
0.28
0.21
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Result Accuracy (Acc)
0.70.72
0.8
0.19
0.64
0.280.25
(a) IoT
(b) E-Commerce
(c) Financial
(d) Business Intelligence
(e) File Sharing
(f) Social Media
HumanDBA
D-Bot(GPT-4)
D-Bot(GPT-3.5)
DNN
DecisionTree
GPT-4
GPT-3.5
Figure 8: Performance Comparison (Result Accuracy). Note Acc is a general numerical metric, which cannot fully reflect the
diagnosis capacity (e.g., whether the diagnosis process is reasonable)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.730.77
0.55
0.180.14
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.92
0.530.51
0.26
0.09
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.96
0.77
0.30
0.160.11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.78
0.52
0.35
0.080.15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.77
0.57
0.38
0.240.17
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.670.720.72
0.200.18
(a) IoT
(b) E-Commerce
(c) Financial
(d) Business Intelligence
(e) File Sharing
(f) Social Media
HumanDBA
D-Bot(GPT-4)
D-Bot(GPT-3.5)
GPT-4
GPT-3.5
Figure 9: Performance Comparison (Human Evaluation). We do not include DNN and DecisionTree because they either have the
black-box problem or fail to provide root cause analysis that is easy to understand by humans.
Table 2: Performance on different anomalies.
Diagnosis
Single Cause Anomaly
Multi-Cause Anomaly
Method
Acc
HEval
Acc
HEval
HumanDBA
0.955
0.720
0.487
0.806
D-Bot (GPT-4)
0.754
0.500
0.655
0.669
D-Bot (GPT-3.5)
0.542
0.370
0.533
0.493
DNN
0.352
N/A
0.036
N/A
DecisionTree
0.331
N/A
0.086
N/A
GPT-4
0.351
0.39
0.105
0.151
GPT-3.5
0.266
0.2
0.144
0.130
Diagnosis Performance. D-Bot achieves competitive performance
as HumanDBA, such as outperforming HumanDBA with an accu-
racy of 80% (D-Bot (GPT-3.5)) for the Social Media application. D-
Bot also demonstrates significant performance gains over the rest
baselines (e.g., accuracy improvements ranging from 8% to 54%
against DNN and DecisionTree). The reasons are three-fold.
First, D-Bot can judiciously utilize tools and provide informed
diagnosis. For instance, It identifies specific problems such as “high
memory usage due to heavy use of UPDATE and INSERT operations
over the same tables” by querying the pg_stat_statements view. Con-
versely, the baselines struggle to detect the root causes, often de-
faulting to generic advice such as “resolve resource contention issues”,
which lack the specificity needed for actionable improvements, ren-
dering them less effective in practical applications.
Second, D-Bot (GPT-4) owns contextual comprehension (LLM)
and tree-search reasoning capability. For instance, with the re-
flection mechanism, D-Bot (GPT-4) can conduct comprehensive
analysis and follow the most beneficial chain of actions (e.g., cal-
culating the total cost of a plan and deciding the optimization
actions). In contrast, the baselines only input with basic abnormal
metric values, perform general analysis, and often overlook under-
lying causes. For instance, in an INSERT_LARGE_DATA case, GPT-4
merely identifies an increased count of running processes using the
node_procs_running metric, resulting in an early diagnosis termi-
nation. Moreover, DNN and DecisionTree cannot leverage textual
data, leading to their inability to resolve complex anomalies such
as Poor Join.
Third, D-Bot (GPT-4) utilizes the document knowledge to learn
the analysis of potential performance bottlenecks like correlated-
subquery structure. We find GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 tend to make unsup-
ported hypotheses, leading to inaccurate diagnostics. For example,
upon detecting SORT operations in logged queries, GPT-3.5 inaccu-
rately attributes the bottleneck to “frequent reading and sorting of
large data volumes”, missing query structure problems. Compared to
HumanDBA, D-Bot (GPT-4) is more careful in capturing important
details that help find the root causes. For example, in Social Media,
D-Bot (GPT-4) does better than HumanDBA by collecting data from
various sources (such as multiple system metrics and how query
operators consume resources). This helps uncover problems like
high I/O issues caused by concurrent inserts, which HumanDBA
might ignore when focusing on a few slow queries.
Diagnosis Overhead. (1) Diagnosis Time. HumanDBA needs one
to two hours to write a diagnosis report even for typical anomalies.
This time is mainly consumed in devising solutions like indexing
and query rewriting, even when the root cause is relatively straight-
forward. Instead, D-Bot, takes ten to several minutes to diagnose
relatively complex anomalies (e.g., 5.38 minutes for a composite
anomaly 𝑘with two root causes). Because D-Bot can efficiently
interact with pre-equipped tools (context embedding) and enhance
the efficiency (collaboration of multiple LLMs). Traditional classi-
fiers have lowest diagnosis time, as they simply map limited metrics
to predefined causes. (2) Diagnosis Expense. Traditional classifiers
10

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.77
0.39 0.35
0.02
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.53
0.15
0.34
0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.77
0.17 0.19
0.32
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.52
0.41
0.18 0.19
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.57
0.18 0.12 0.12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human Accuracy (HEval)
0.72
0.19
0.11
0.18
(a) IoT
(b) E-Commerce
(c) Financial
(d) Business Intelligence
(e) File Sharing
(f) Social Media
D-Bot(GPT-4)
NoKnowledge
NoTreeSearch
NoMultiLLM
Figure 10: Ablation Study (Human Evaluation)
and D-Bot are more economical than HumanDBA. DNN and Deci-
sionTree require minimal system resources. And D-Bot can save
much manpower at a minimal financial cost (e.g., 1.8 dollar for
diagnosing the anomaly 𝑘with 40k LLM tokens).
Finding 1. D-Bot achieves a remarkable improvement over base-
lines (8% to 54%) due to its advanced contextual understanding
and knowledge and tool utilization, and even competes closely
with human expertise.
Performance for Different Anomalies. D-Bot (GPT-4), while
having lower accuracy in single cause anomalies (0.754), shows
a remarkable consistency in multi-cause anomalies with an accu-
racy of 0.655. This consistency is also reflected in the HEval scores
(0.500 and 0.669, respectively), suggesting that D-Bot (GPT-4) main-
tains stable performance across different types of anomalies. D-Bot
(GPT-3.5) and other methods like DNN, DecisionTree, GPT-4, and
GPT-3.5 show a general trend of lower performance in both Acc and
HEval, especially in multi-cause anomalies, highlighting the com-
plexity of these scenarios that require advanced diagnosis methods
like D-Bot. Meanwhile, for HumanDBA, the HEval scores are rela-
tively high for both single (0.720) and multi-cause anomalies (0.806),
demonstrating the necessity of understanding human experience.
Finding 2. D-Bot provides a more balanced and reliable perfor-
mance across diverse and complex anomaly types.
LLM Factors. The performance gap between D-Bot (GPT-4) and D-
Bot (GPT-3.5) is significant, with D-Bot (GPT-4) outperforming D-Bot
(GPT-3.5) by up to 30% in accuracy and stability in applications. D-
Bot (GPT-4) excels in generating precise tool calling commands and
comprehensive diagnosis summaries. For instance, it adeptly iden-
tifies complex queries involving large table fetches, a task where
D-Bot (GPT-3.5) often falls short. In contrast, D-Bot (GPT-3.5) is
prone to producing more generalized and sometimes inaccurate
action commands, leading to less effective outcomes.
Finding 3. A powerful LLM can benefit the diagnosis perfor-
mance of D-Bot, which reflects in the effectiveness of prompt
following and the depth of root cause analysis.
8.4
Ablation Study
As shown in Figure 10, we verify the effectiveness of three main
components in D-Bot, i.e., document knowledge matching (No-
Knowledge), tree-search-based reasoning (NoTreeSearch), and multi-
agent diagnosis (SingleLLM).
8.4.1
Document Knowledge Matching. Without the relevant knowl-
edge in the prompt, LLM experts mainly rely on expert settings (i.e.,
role, task, steps) to call tools and analyze root causes. When com-
paring NoKnowledge to D-Bot, we observe a decrease in diagnosis
accuracy ranging from 19.2% to 64.1%. We have two observations.
First, NoKnowledge produces significantly more redundant root
causes (e.g., 2.05 times against D-Bot (GPT-4)), as it can’t clearly tell
apart relevant root causes using just the context. For instance, root
causes like “many inserts” and “large data insert” both involve insert
operations, but identifying them correctly requires specific knowl-
edge about details like the number of insert operations and table
sizes. Second, like the baselines, NoKnowledge often provides very
general diagnoses (e.g., “abnormal patterns in CPU processes”) and
fails to accurately identify many anomalies. Moreover, we also find
that, although LLMs like GPT-4 are pre-trained on open corpora,
they need external knowledge matching (fine-tuning is limited in
updating knowledge) for specialized tasks like database diagnosis.
8.4.2
Tree Search Based Diagnosis. NoTreeSearch diagnoses less
effectively than D-Bot (GPT-4), showing a performance decrease by
over 35.85%. It verifies that tree search plays an important role in
correcting wrong knowledge matching or tool API callings (actions
for extending child nodes), which significantly enhances the diag-
nosis accuracy, particularly for single-cause anomalies that involve
various reasoning choices. For instance, in scenarios such as identi-
fying specific query-related issues or optimizing database knobs,
tree search enables D-Bot (GPT-4) to navigate through multiple
potential solutions and pinpoint the most effective one.
8.4.3
Multi-Agent Diagnosis. Our analysis verifies the effectiveness
of multi-agent mode (D-Bot (GPT-4)) over single-agent mode (sin-
gle). For instance, in the IoT application, D-Bot (GPT-4) achieves a
77.27% success rate in identifying root causes, a substantial increase
from the 39.09% success rate of SingleLLM. Besides, our tests on
average diagnosis time revealed that D-Bot (multi-agent mode) is
more efficient compared to SingleLLM (single-agent mode). The rea-
sons are two-fold. First, D-Bot employs more than two experts in
average (at most three), which utilize different metrics and domain
knowledge to explore root causes and derive more root causes than
SingleLLM. And these root causes are further examined, selected
11

(a) Subtasks in Finetuning Samples
(b) Training Loss for Localized LLMs 
(c) Testing Results (Acc)
e-commerce
financial
IoT
BI
file sharing
social media
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(d) Testing Results (HEval)
e-commerce
financial
IoT
BI
file sharing
social media
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
D-Bot(GPT-4)
D-Bot(Baichuan2)
D-Bot(CodeLlama)
D-Bot(GPT-4)
D-Bot(Baichuan2)
D-Bot(CodeLlama)
Figure 11: Performance of Model Finetuning.
and refined during cross-review. Thus, D-Bot achieves higher di-
agnosis accuracy than SingleLLM. Second, although D-Bot takes
time to select experts and conduct cross-reviews, the asynchronous
mechanism reduces the iteration turns of tree-search algorithm in
single experts, which generally take most diagnosis time. And so
D-Bot is also more efficient than SingleLLM in diagnosis time.
Finding 4. Techniques proposed in D-Bot are crucial to boost
diagnosis accuracy by reducing redundant root causes and en-
hancing precise anomaly identification.
8.5
Model Fine-tuning
Preparation. We first record the diagnosis processes of D-Bot (GPT-
4) consisting of 5 sub-tasks (e.g., tool calling) and 2819 samples in
total (see Figure 11(a)). We mix them together as a multi-task fine-
tuning dataset. Specifically, the model input includes the prompt
and historical messages, and we fine-tune LLMs to simulate the
corresponding D-Bot (GPT-4) response (after cleansed). LLMs are im-
plemented using PyTorch and BMTrain [59], trained on a machine
with 503 GB RAM and 1 NVIDIA A100 GPU.
Training Procedure. We fine-tune three localized SOTA LLMs,
i.e., Llama 2-13B, CodeLlama-13B, Baichuan2-13B. As shown in Fig-
ure 11(b), all LLMs converge within 10 epochs. We then manually
select the best epoch checkpoints (i.e., 4th epoch for Llama 2, 1st
epoch for CodeLlama, 10th epoch for Baichuan 2). Note the obvious
loss reduction does not mean increasing model performance. We find
many epoch checkpoints with low losses often over-fit the fine-
tuning data (e.g., losing the text generation capabilities and tending
to generate short confusing responses). Besides, Llama 2 cannot
generate reasonable diagnosis results (Acc equals 0 for most cases)
even in the best epoch.
Performance Comparison. As shown in Figure 11(c)-(d), the
demonstrated LLMs after fine-tuning achieve comparable perfor-
mance to GPT-4 in 27 test cases. We have several observations. First,
CodeLlama performs best in financial, IoT and BI applications, be-
cause CodeLlama is specialized for code generation, which is more
sensitive to metrics and queries. For instance, it can accurately
identify slow queries involving multiple JOINs as root cause. Sec-
ond, Baichuan2 performs best for file application, which can assign
suitable experts (e.g., Memory Expert), and analyze root causes in
detail (e.g., pointing out disk I/O under-provisioned in the hardware
configuration). However, the HEval performance of Baichuan2 in
financial application significantly degrades. For example, the model
may list many root causes but does not give well-founded analysis.
Third, GPT-4 performs best for e-commerce and media applications,
and shows balanced performance across all applications. Moreover,
the localized LLMs show less generalizability to unfamiliar anom-
alies. For instance, the number of samples with delete operations
as root causes is much smaller than others, causing the fine-tuned
LLMs to often fail in these cases.
Finding 5. D-Bot using localized SOTA LLMs can achieve com-
parable diagnosis performance to D-Bot (GPT-4), but their
generalizability is greatly affected by the fine-tuning samples.
9
RELATED WORK
Database Diagnosis. Existing works mainly rely on empirical
rules and classification methods to analyze root causes. The ADDM
tool [12] maintains a graph of database resource modules, based
on which they estimate the query execution time and infer the
bottlenecks. DBSherlock [58] utilizes a decision-tree-like method
to construct predicates (in the form of 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑟> 𝑘). ISQUAD [34]
generates root causes by clustering queries with their metric vectors.
However, these methods require great human intervention (e.g.,
designing rules, features, labels). Besides, they lack some critical
capabilities (e.g., accepting new contextual information, analyzing
query logs) for real-world diagnosis. Although there are some LLM-
based methods that incorporate maintenance knowledge [31], they
focus on general chatbot tools (e.g., Q&A exercises) and also fail to
conduct scenario-specific diagnosis.
LLM Agents. Recent works have shown that LLMs, when coupled
with memory mechanisms and tools, can imitate human-like in-
teractions and decision-making in a real-world context [41]. First,
the augmentation of LLM agents with a variety of tools — ranging
from web browser [35, 39] and wikipedia search [50, 57], to code
interpreter [11, 16, 33] and multifaceted toolsets [42, 48] — has
significantly enhanced LLM’s adaptability. Besides individual agent
skills, there is increasing interest in coordinating multiple LLM
agents for collective intelligence [15, 19, 26, 37, 38, 55]. Notably,
AgentVerse [10] shows that teamwork among multiple LLM agents
can perform better single agents in many tasks. D-Bot presents an
LLM-powered diagnosis system in the multi-agent paradigm.
10
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a database diagnosis system leveraging
large language models (LLMs). We conducted offline knowledge
extraction from documents and prepared function APIs from exist-
ing tools. We matched with suitable knowledge and APIs into LLM
prompt for online diagnosis, and we proposed a tree search-based
algorithm to accurately and effectively utilize tools and conduct
analysis with knowledge. We designed a collaborative diagnosis
mechanism that improved the efficiency with the collaboration
12

of multiple LLMs. Experimental results showed D-Bot achieved
remarkable improvements over baselines and human DBAs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank (1) Dongfeng Li for anomaly simulation support, (2) Wei
Zhou for tool plugin assistant, (3) Xiaohui Nie, Dan Pei, Binyuan
Hui, Chen Qian, Yu Shen for their valuable advice on this research.
13

REFERENCES
[1] https://github.com/openbmb/agentverse, Last Accessed In December, 2023.
[2] https://openai.com/, Last Accessed In December, 2023.
[3] https://github.com/hypopg/hypopg, Last Accessed In September, 2023.
[4] https://pgtune.leopard.in.ua/, Last Accessed in September, 2023.
[5] Edmon Begoli, Jesús Camacho-Rodríguez, Julian Hyde, Michael J Mior, and Daniel
Lemire. Apache calcite: A foundational framework for optimized query process-
ing over heterogeneous data sources. In Proceedings of the 2018 International
Conference on Management of Data, pages 221–230, 2018.
[6] Vance W Berger and YanYan Zhou. Kolmogorov–smirnov test: Overview. Wiley
statsref: Statistics reference online, 2014.
[7] Harrison Chase. LangChain. https://github.com/hwchase17/langchain, 2022.
[8] Surajit Chaudhuri and Vivek R. Narasayya. An efficient cost-driven index selec-
tion tool for microsoft SQL server. In VLDB, pages 146–155, 1997.
[9] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In
sigkdd, pages 785–794, 2016.
[10] Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian,
Chi-Min Chan, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun,
and Jie Zhou. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring
emergent behaviors in agents. CoRR, abs/2308.10848, 2023.
[11] Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W. Cohen. Program of
thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical
reasoning tasks. CoRR, abs/2211.12588, 2022.
[12] Karl Dias, Mark Ramacher, Uri Shaft, Venkateshwaran Venkataramani, and Gra-
ham Wood. Automatic performance diagnosis and tuning in oracle. In Second
Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research, CIDR 2005, Asilomar,
CA, USA, January 4-7, 2005, Online Proceedings, pages 84–94. www.cidrdb.org,
2005.
[13] Ning Ding, Shengding Hu, Weilin Zhao, Yulin Chen, Zhiyuan Liu, Hai-Tao Zheng,
and Maosong Sun. Openprompt: An open-source framework for prompt-learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01998, 2021.
[14] Jesse Dodge, Gabriel Ilharco, Roy Schwartz, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
and Noah Smith. Fine-tuning pretrained language models: Weight initializations,
data orders, and early stopping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06305, 2020.
[15] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch.
Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent
debate. CoRR, abs/2305.14325, 2023.
[16] Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang,
Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. PAL: program-aided language models. In
Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan
Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023.
[17] Gongde Guo, Hui Wang, David Bell, Yaxin Bi, and Kieran Greer. Knn model-based
approach in classification. In CoopIS, pages 986–996. Springer, 2003.
[18] Li Hai-Xiang, Li Xiao-Yan, Liu Chang, and et al. Systematic definition and
classification of data anomalies in dbms (english version).
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14230, 2021.
[19] Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, and et al. Metagpt: Meta programming
for multi-agent collaborative framework. CoRR, abs/2308.00352, 2023.
[20] Shiyue Huang, Ziwei Wang, Xinyi Zhang, Yaofeng Tu, Zhongliang Li, and Bin
Cui. DBPA: A benchmark for transactional database performance anomalies.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, 1(1):72:1–72:26, 2023.
[21] Lianyuan Jin and Guoliang Li. Ai-based database performance diagnosis. Journal
of Software, 32(3):845–858, 2021.
[22] Prajakta Kalmegh, Shivnath Babu, and Sudeepa Roy. iqcar: inter-query contention
analyzer for data analytics frameworks. In Peter A. Boncz, Stefan Manegold,
Anastasia Ailamaki, Amol Deshpande, and Tim Kraska, editors, Proceedings of
the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD Conference
2019, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 30 - July 5, 2019, pages 918–935. ACM,
2019.
[23] Kamran Khan, Saif Ur Rehman, Kamran Aziz, Simon Fong, and Sababady Saras-
vady. Dbscan: Past, present and future. In ICADIWT 2014, pages 232–238. IEEE,
2014.
[24] Jay Kreps, Neha Narkhede, Jun Rao, et al. Kafka: A distributed messaging system
for log processing. In Proceedings of the NetDB, volume 11, pages 1–7. Athens,
Greece, 2011.
[25] Hai Lan, Zhifeng Bao, and Yuwei Peng. An index advisor using deep reinforce-
ment learning. In CIKM, pages 2105–2108. ACM, 2020.
[26] Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and
Bernard Ghanem. CAMEL: communicative agents for "mind" exploration of
large scale language model society. CoRR, abs/2303.17760, 2023.
[27] Jiaqi Li, Mengmeng Wang, Zilong Zheng, and Muhan Zhang. Loogle: Can
long-context language models understand long contexts?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.04939, 2023.
[28] Zeyan Li, Nengwen Zhao, Mingjie Li, et al. Actionable and interpretable fault
localization for recurring failures in online service systems. In Proceedings of the
30th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 996–1008, 2022.
[29] Ping Liu, Shenglin Zhang, Yongqian Sun, Yuan Meng, Jiahai Yang, and Dan Pei.
Fluxinfer: Automatic diagnosis of performance anomaly for online database
system. In 39th IEEE International Performance Computing and Communications
Conference, IPCCC 2020, Austin, TX, USA, November 6-8, 2020, pages 1–8. IEEE,
2020.
[30] Xiaoze Liu, Zheng Yin, Chao Zhao, Congcong Ge, Lu Chen, Yunjun Gao, Dimeng
Li, Ziting Wang, Gaozhong Liang, Jian Tan, and Feifei Li. Pinsql: Pinpoint
root cause sqls to resolve performance issues in cloud databases. In 38th IEEE
International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE 2022, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
May 9-12, 2022, pages 2549–2561. IEEE, 2022.
[31] Yuhe Liu, Changhua Pei, Longlong Xu, Bohan Chen, Mingze Sun, Zhirui Zhang,
Yongqian Sun, Shenglin Zhang, Kun Wang, Haiming Zhang, et al. Opseval: A
comprehensive task-oriented aiops benchmark for large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.07637, 2023.
[32] Xianglin Lu, Zhe Xie, Zeyan Li, Mingjie Li, Xiaohui Nie, Nengwen Zhao,
Qingyang Yu, Shenglin Zhang, Kaixin Sui, Lin Zhu, and Dan Pei. Generic and
robust performance diagnosis via causal inference for OLTP database systems.
In 22nd IEEE International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing,
CCGrid 2022, Taormina, Italy, May 16-19, 2022, pages 655–664. IEEE, 2022.
[33] Killian Lucas. Open interpreter. https://github.com/charlespwd/project-title,
2023.
[34] Minghua Ma, Zheng Yin, Shenglin Zhang, and et al. Diagnosing root causes
of intermittent slow queries in large-scale cloud databases. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
13(8):1176–1189, 2020.
[35] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, and et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. CoRR, abs/2112.09332, 2021.
[36] Brammert Ottens, Christos Dimitrakakis, and Boi Faltings. Duct: An upper
confidence bound approach to distributed constraint optimization problems.
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 8(5):1–27, 2017.
[37] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of
human behavior. CoRR, abs/2304.03442, 2023.
[38] Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, and et al. Com-
municative agents for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924,
2023.
[39] Yujia Qin, Zihan Cai, Dian Jin, and et al. Webcpm: Interactive web search
for chinese long-form question answering. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-
Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki, editors, ACL, pages 8968–8988. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2023.
[40] Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, and et al. Tool learning with foundation
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08354, 2023.
[41] Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, and et al. Tool learning with foundation
models. CoRR, abs/2304.08354, 2023.
[42] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, and et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language
models to master 16000+ real-world apis. CoRR, abs/2307.16789, 2023.
[43] Raji Ramachandran, R Nidhin, and PP Shogil. Anomaly detection in role admin-
istered relational databases—a novel method. In ICACCI, pages 1017–1021. IEEE,
2018.
[44] Vipula Rawte, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. A survey of hallucination in large
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05922, 2023.
[45] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun
Wan, editors, EMNLP-IJCNLP, pages 3980–3990. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2019.
[46] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
[47] Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. The probabilistic relevance framework:
Bm25 and beyond. Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval, 3(4):333–389,
2009.
[48] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language
models can teach themselves to use tools. CoRR, abs/2302.04761, 2023.
[49] Yan-Yan Song and LU Ying. Decision tree methods: applications for classification
and prediction. Shanghai archives of psychiatry, 27(2):130, 2015.
[50] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabhar-
wal. Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-
intensive multi-step questions. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and
Naoaki Okazaki, editors, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada,
July 9-14, 2023, pages 10014–10037. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2023.
[51] Immanuel Trummer. DB-BERT: A database tuning tool that "reads the manual".
In Zachary G. Ives, Angela Bonifati, and Amr El Abbadi, editors, SIGMOD ’22:
International Conference on Management of Data, Philadelphia, PA, USA, June 12 -
17, 2022, pages 190–203. ACM, 2022.
[52] Gary Valentin, Michael Zuliani, Daniel C. Zilio, Guy M. Lohman, and Alan Skelley.
DB2 advisor: An optimizer smart enough to recommend its own indexes. In
14

ICDE, pages 101–110, 2000.
[53] Zhaoguo Wang, Zhou Zhou, Yicun Yang, Haoran Ding, Gansen Hu, Ding Ding,
Chuzhe Tang, Haibo Chen, and Jinyang Li. Wetune: Automatic discovery and
verification of query rewrite rules. In Proceedings of the 2022 International
Conference on Management of Data, pages 94–107, 2022.
[54] Kyu-Young Whang. Index selection in relational databases. Foundations of Data
Organization, pages 487–500, 1987.
[55] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang
Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling
next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation framework. CoRR,
abs/2308.08155, 2023.
[56] Wenhan Xiong, Jingyu Liu, Igor Molybog, et al. Effective long-context scaling of
foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16039, 2023.
[57] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R.
Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023.
[58] Dong Young Yoon, Ning Niu, and Barzan Mozafari. Dbsherlock: A performance
diagnostic tool for transactional databases. In Fatma Özcan, Georgia Koutrika,
and Sam Madden, editors, Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on
Management of Data, SIGMOD Conference 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA, June 26 -
July 01, 2016, pages 1599–1614. ACM, 2016.
[59] Guoyang Zeng, Xu Han, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhiyuan Liu, Yankai Lin, and Maosong
Sun. Openbmb: Big model systems for large-scale representation learning. In
Representation Learning for Natural Language Processing, pages 463–489. Springer
Nature Singapore Singapore, 2023.
[60] Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan
Wang, Lei Shen, Andi Wang, Yang Li, et al. Codegeex: A pre-trained model for
code generation with multilingual evaluations on humaneval-x. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.17568, 2023.
[61] Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, and Zhiyuan Liu.
Llm as dba.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.05481, 2023.
[62] Xuanhe Zhou, Luyang Liu, and et al. Autoindex: An incremental index manage-
ment system for dynamic workloads. In ICDE, pages 2196–2208. IEEE, 2022.
[63] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis,
Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt
engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910, 2022.
15
,
