LLM Agent Communication Protocol (LACP)
Requires Urgent Standardization:
A Telecom-Inspired Protocol is Necessary
Xin Li
Mengbing Liu
Chau Yuen
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (EEE),
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{xin019, mengbing001}@e.ntu.edu.sg
chau.yuen@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
This position paper argues that the field of LLM agents requires a unified,
telecom-inspired communication protocol to ensure safety, interoperability,
and scalability, especially within the context of Next Generation (NextG)
networks. Current ad-hoc communication methods are creating a fragmented
ecosystem, reminiscent of the early "protocol wars" in networking, which stifles
innovation and poses significant risks. Drawing inspiration from the layered,
standardized protocols that underpin modern telecommunications, we propose the
LLM-Agent Communication Protocol (LACP). LACP establishes a three-layer
architecture designed to ensure semantic clarity in communication, transactional
integrity for complex tasks, and robust, built-in security. In this position paper, we
argue that adopting a principled, universal protocol is not merely beneficial but
essential for realizing the potential of distributed AI. Such a standard is critical for
ensuring that multi-agent systems can operate safely and reliably in the complex,
real-time applications envisioned for 6G and beyond.
1
Introduction
The rapid proliferation of Large Language Model (LLM) agents is poised to reshape industries ranging
from autonomous systems to scientific discovery [Guo et al., 2024, Fan et al., 2025, Wu et al., 2025].
As these agents gain increasingly sophisticated capabilities, their ability to collaborate on complex,
multi-step tasks becomes a critical enabler for real-world deployment. Yet, the current ecosystem
of inter-agent communication remains a patchwork of proprietary, purpose-built protocols. This
fragmentation creates a persistent communication chasm—hindering interoperability, compromising
security, and impeding reproducible scientific progress [Yang et al., 2025].
Figure 1(a) illustrates the detrimental effects of this ad-hoc landscape: ambiguous semantics, security
vulnerabilities, and unreliable information exchange frequently culminate in task failures. In contrast,
Figure 1(b) envisions a standardized framework, LLM-Agent Communication Protocol (LACP),
that delivers clarity, security, and transactional reliability, enabling robust agent communication.
The situation is reminiscent of the “protocol wars” of the 1970s–1990s, where a lack of standardization
hindered the growth of computer networking until the widespread adoption of TCP/IP [Tanenbaum,
2003, Leiner et al., 2009]. The historical lesson is unambiguous: without a common communication
substrate, the transformative potential of distributed systems remains unrealized.
Motivated by the success of standardization in telecommunications, we propose LACP, a telecom-
inspired communication protocol for LLM agents. We argue that, for deployment in high-stakes
environments such as NextG networks, a unified, secure, and extensible protocol is not merely
advantageous—it is essential.
NeurIPS 2025 AI4NextG Workshop.
arXiv:2510.13821v1  [cs.NI]  26 Sep 2025

Figure 1: LLM Agent Communication: From Ad-Hoc Chaos to LACP Clarity.
(a) Without LACP: Fragmentation, ambiguity, and failure. Ad-hoc protocols lack authentication and
semantic alignment, leading to disrupted workflows, miscommunication, and unauthorized operations.
Malformed or incomplete messages escalate coordination costs and risk system inconsistency.
(b) With LACP: Structured, secure, and transactional. Every message is authenticated, semantically
grounded in a clear target, and executed as part of an atomic transaction. This ensures end-to-end
integrity, minimizes ambiguity, and enables reliable collaboration in safety-critical contexts.
Our contributions are:
• Risk analysis: Identification of systemic risks arising from the fragmented state of current
agent communication.
• Design principles: Core guidelines for robust, interoperable agent protocols, distilled from
the history of telecommunications.
• Protocol proposal: LACP, a layered, secure, and extensible framework for LLM-agent
interoperability.
• Critical discourse: Anticipation and rebuttal of key counterarguments to standardization.
2
The Problem: A Fragmented LLM-Agent Communication Landscape
The current ecosystem of LLM agent communication is characterized by a variety of protocols, each
designed to address specific interoperability tiers or deployment contexts. While protocols such
as OpenAI’s Function Calling [OpenAI, 2023], LangChain’s Agent Protocol [LangChain, 2024],
Anthropic’s Model Context Protocol (MCP) [Anthropic, 2024], ACP [BM BeeAI, 2024], ANP [ANP
Contributors, 2024], Agora [Marro et al., 2024], and Google’s Agent2Agent (A2A) [Google, 2025]
have advanced agent capabilities [Ehtesham et al., 2025], their diversity introduces systemic risks
and hinders progress (summarized in Table 1). This fragmentation leads to three critical deficiencies:
Crippling Interoperability Gaps: The absence of a universal standard necessitates bespoke, often
brittle, integrations between different agent systems. This not only impedes the development of
scalable, heterogeneous multi-agent systems but also complicates the rigorous benchmarking and
comparative analysis of agent performance.
Security as an Afterthought: Security is often not a core, mandatory component of existing protocols.
This design choice exposes systems to significant risks, including data tampering, agent spoofing, and
other adversarial attacks, which is particularly concerning for safety-critical applications in finance,
healthcare, and autonomous systems envisioned for NextG.
Monolithic Design & Lack of Transactional Integrity: Current approaches often tightly couple
communication logic with core agent implementation. This leads to monolithic systems that are
challenging to maintain, debug, and extend. Furthermore, the general absence of built-in support for
atomic transactions undermines the reliability of complex, multi-step operations.
2

Table 1: Comparison of agent communication protocols and how LACP addresses their limitations.
Framework
Released
Developer
Interface Type
Key Features
Security Features
Functions Call
June 2023
OpenAI
JSON schema
Single-step tool calling
API key auth only
Agent Protocol
Nov 2024
LangChain
REST API
Framework-agnostic APIs
HTTP/JWT auth only
MCP
Nov 2024
Anthropic
JSON-RPC/HTTP
Tool-resource-prompt, Context std.
OAuth 2.1; Access controls
ACP
2024 (Draft)
IBM/LF
JSON-RPC
Multimodal, Async streaming
Signed capability tokens; RBAC
ANP
Mar 2024
Community
DID/JSON-LD
Decentralized identity, Discovery
W3C DIDs, Encrypted comms
Agora
Oct 2024
Academia
Meta protocol
Hybrid NL/structured, Negotiation
Hash-based ID, Security PDs
A2A
Apr 2025
Google
HTTP/Protobuf
Peer-to-peer, Agent Cards, Async
Capability discovery, (Auth/TLS)
LACP (Proposed)
2025
Open Standard
Layered
Layered semantics, transactions
E2E crypto, 2PC, Auth (core)
These limitations pose a substantial barrier to deploying the large-scale, interconnected, and au-
tonomous agent systems envisioned for real-time, safety-critical scenarios in emerging domains like
NextG networks.
3
Insights from Telecommunications Standardization
To solve these challenges, we can draw powerful insights from the historical success of telecommu-
nications, which transformed a similar landscape of disparate, proprietary systems into a globally
unified network. This evolution provides a clear blueprint for addressing each of the deficiencies
identified above:
To combat limited interoperability, the telecom industry established consensus-driven open stan-
dards through collaborative bodies like the ITU [ITU, 1865] and 3GPP [3GPP, 1998]. This prevented
vendor lock-in and guaranteed that components from different manufacturers could seamlessly
connect, a direct parallel to the needs of a heterogeneous agent ecosystem.
To remedy inadequate security, mature telecom protocols were built with security by construction.
Security was not an add-on but a fundamental, non-negotiable component at every layer. Agent
communication must adopt this same ’security-first’ principle to be viable for critical applications.
To overcome monolithic architectures, telecommunications relied on layered abstractions, fa-
mously captured in the OSI model. By separating concerns like physical transmission from logical
addressing, the model allows different parts of the stack to evolve independently. This modularity is
precisely what is needed to create maintainable and extensible multi-agent systems.
Underpinning these solutions is the "narrow waist" principle: defining a minimal core with an
extensible edge. Standards like the Internet Protocol (IP) provide a universal, simple core for
interoperability while allowing for immense innovation and complexity at the application layer. This
model proves it is possible to create a universal standard that provides stability without stifling
flexibility—the exact balance required for the future of agent communication.
4
LACP: A Principled Communication Framework
The systemic deficiencies inherent to contemporary LLM-agent communication paradigms necessitate
a foundational shift toward standardization. Inspired by proven telecom engineering principles,
we introduce the LACP—a principled framework that ensures secure, reliable, and interoperable
communications within multi-agent systems. LACP is a three-layer protocol designed to address the
systemic deficiencies of current agent communication methods. It is built on the principles of layered
abstraction, security-by-design, and a minimal, extensible core.
4.1
Three-Layer Architecture: Separation of Concerns
LACP’s architecture (Figure 2) implements three mutually-insulated layers, each with well-defined
interfaces that enable independent evolution while ensuring system-wide coherence:
Semantic Layer. This layer is responsible for conveying the intent of a communication. It defines
a minimal set of universal message types (e.g., PLAN, ACT, OBSERVE) that can be extended with
domain-specific content. This "narrow waist" approach ensures that all agents can understand the
basic intent of a message, while still allowing for rich, complex communication. Table 2 shows the
core message types.
3

Figure 2: LACP’s three-layer architecture. Independent layers enable secure, reliable communication
with clearly defined semantic intents, transactional integrity, and flexible transport mechanisms.
Transactional Layer. This layer ensures the reliability and integrity of communications. It provides
mechanisms for message signing, sequencing, unique transaction IDs for idempotency, and support
for atomic transactions (e.g., two-phase commit concepts). This layer is critical for ensuring that
multi-agent interactions are secure and robust, especially in safety-critical applications.
Transport Layer. This layer is responsible for the efficient and secure delivery of messages. It is
transport-agnostic, meaning it can operate over a variety of network protocols (e.g., HTTP/2, QUIC,
WebSockets). This allows LACP to adapt to different network environments and
Table 2: Core LACP message types (all wrapped in a JWS envelope).
Type
Mandatory fields
Optional fields
Purpose
PLAN
intent_id, role, natural_language
graph_ops
Express high-level intent
ACT
intent_id, tool_call, params
deadline, cost_cap
Invoke an external tool
OBSERVE
intent_id, status, output
metrics
Return results/status
4.2
Anticipated Impact
The adoption of LACP, or a similar standardized protocol, would have a transformative impact on the
field of multi-agent AI:
Enhanced Safety and Reliability: By making security and transactional integrity core components
of the protocol, LACP provides a verifiable foundation for agent actions.
System-Wide Interoperability: A universal standard would allow agents from different developers
and organizations to collaborate seamlessly, fostering a richer and more capable ecosystem.
Accelerated Scientific Progress: A common protocol would enable reproducible experiments and
fair benchmarking, leading to faster innovation.
A Foundation for the Agent Economy: A trusted and standardized means of interaction is a
prerequisite for a sophisticated agent economy, where agents can discover, contract, and collaborate
on complex tasks.
5
Conclusion
The field of multi-agent AI is at a critical inflection point. The current path of fragmentation is
unsustainable and will ultimately limit the potential of this transformative technology. We have drawn
a parallel to the history of telecommunications to argue that the time for standardization is now.
We have proposed LACP as a concrete example of a principled, layered, and secure communication
protocol for LLM agents. By adopting a telecom-inspired approach, we can build a future where
multi-agent systems are safe, reliable, and interoperable.
We call on the NeurIPS community, and the broader AI and networking communities, to join us
in this effort. The development of a unified agent communication protocol is a challenge that will
require collaboration between academia, industry, and open-source developers.
The window of opportunity is now, before the patterns of fragmentation become too entrenched to
overcome. The future of collaborative AI depends on it.
4

References
3GPP. 3GPP: The 3rd Generation Partnership Project. https://www.3gpp.org/, 1998.
ANP Contributors. Agent Network Protocol (ANP). https://github.com/agent-network-protocol/
AgentNetworkProtocol, 2024. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025.
Anthropic.
The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku.
https://www-cdn.anthropic.com/
de8ba9b01c9ab7cbabf5c33b80b7bbc618857627/Model_Card_Claude_3.pdf, 2024. Accessed: 2025-
05-13.
Anthropic.
Introducing
the
Model
Context
Protocol.
https://www.anthropic.com/news/
model-context-protocol, 2024.
M Mahdi Azari, Sourabh Solanki, Symeon Chatzinotas, Oltjon Kodheli, Hazem Sallouha, Achiel Colpaert,
Jesus Fabian Mendoza Montoya, Sofie Pollin, Alireza Haqiqatnejad, Arsham Mostaani, et al. Evolution
of non-terrestrial networks from 5g to 6g: A survey. IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, 24(4):
2633–2672, 2022.
Richard Bernhardt. Macroscopic diversity in frequency reuse radio systems. IEEE journal on selected areas in
communications, 5(5):862–870, 1987.
BM BeeAI. Introduction to Agent Communication Protocol (ACP). https://docs.beeai.dev/acp/alpha/,
2024. Accessed: Apr. 2025.
Abul Ehtesham, Aditi Singh, Gaurav Kumar Gupta, and Saket Kumar. A survey of agent interoperability
protocols: Model Context Protocol (MCP), Agent Communication Protocol (ACP), Agent-to-Agent Protocol
(A2A), and Agent Network Protocol (ANP). arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02279, 2025.
Zhihao Fan, Lai Wei, Jialong Tang, Wei Chen, Wang Siyuan, Zhongyu Wei, and Fei Huang. AI hospital:
Benchmarking large language models in a multi-agent medical interaction simulator. In Owen Rambow,
Leo Wanner, Marianna Apidianaki, Hend Al-Khalifa, Barbara Di Eugenio, and Steven Schockaert, editors,
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 10183–10213, Abu
Dhabi, UAE, January 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.
org/2025.coling-main.680/.
Andreas Gerstlauer, S. Zhao, and A. Horak. Specc system-level design methodology applied to the design of a
gsm vocoder. In Proceedings of the 2000 International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign, pages
163–168. IEEE, 2000.
Google. Agent2agent (a2a) protocol specification. https://google.github.io/A2A, 2025.
Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and
Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.01680, 2024.
Masaharu Hata. Empirical formula for propagation loss in land mobile radio services. IEEE transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 29(3):317–325, 2013.
Harri Holma and Antti Toskala. WCDMA for UMTS: Radio access for third generation mobile communications.
john wiley & sons, 2005.
Chongwen Huang, Alessio Zappone, George C Alexandropoulos, Mérouane Debbah, and Chau Yuen. Reconfig-
urable intelligent surfaces for energy efficiency in wireless communication. IEEE transactions on wireless
communications, 18(8):4157–4170, 2019.
ITU. International Telecommunication Union (ITU). https://www.itu.int/, 1865.
LangChain.
Agent protocol: Interoperability for llm agents.
https://github.com/langchain-ai/
agent-protocol, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-19.
Erik G Larsson, Ove Edfors, Fredrik Tufvesson, and Thomas L Marzetta. Massive mimo for next generation
wireless systems. IEEE communications magazine, 52(2):186–195, 2014.
William C. Y. Lee. Mobile Cellular Telecommunications Systems. McGraw-Hill, 1989. ISBN 978-0071007900.
URL https://books.google.com/books/about/Mobile_Cellular_Telecommunications_Syste.
html?id=fS91Sly6vYgC.
5

Barry M Leiner, Vinton G Cerf, David D Clark, Robert E Kahn, Leonard Kleinrock, Daniel C Lynch, Jon
Postel, Larry G Roberts, and Stephen Wolff. A brief history of the Internet. ACM SIGCOMM computer
communication review, 39(5):22–31, 2009.
Khaled B Letaief, Wei Chen, Yuanming Shi, Jun Zhang, and Ying-Jun Angela Zhang. The roadmap to 6g: Ai
empowered wireless networks. IEEE communications magazine, 57(8):84–90, 2019.
V. H. MacDonald. The cellular concept. Bell System Technical Journal, 58(1):15–41, January 1979. URL
https://archive.org/details/bstj58-1-15.
Samuele Marro, Emanuele La Malfa, Jesse Wright, Guohao Li, Nigel Shadbolt, Michael Wooldridge, and
Philip Torr. A scalable communication protocol for networks of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.11905, 2024.
OpenAI.
Function calling with the openai api.
https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/
function-calling, 2023.
Arogyaswami J Paulraj, Dhananjay A Gore, Rohit U Nabar, and Helmut Bolcskei. An overview of mimo
communications-a key to gigabit wireless. Proceedings of the IEEE, 92(2):198–218, 2004.
Andrew S Tanenbaum. Computer networks. Pearson Education India, 2003.
Yaozu Wu, Dongyuan Li, Yankai Chen, Renhe Jiang, Henry Peng Zou, Liancheng Fang, Zhen Wang, and
Philip S Yu. Multi-agent autonomous driving systems with large language models: A survey of recent
advances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16804, 2025.
Yingxuan Yang, Huacan Chai, Yuanyi Song, Siyuan Qi, Muning Wen, Ning Li, Junwei Liao, Haoyi Hu, Jianghao
Lin, Gaowei Chang, et al. A survey of ai agent protocols. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16736, 2025.
Hujun Yin and Siavash Alamouti. Ofdma: A broadband wireless access technology. In 2006 IEEE sarnoff
symposium, pages 1–4. IEEE, 2006.
6

A
Experimental Validation of LACP
To validate the practical feasibility, performance characteristics, and security guarantees of the LLM
Agent Communication Protocol (LACP), we implemented a working prototype and conducted a
series of targeted experiments. This appendix details the methodology and results of these validations.
A.1
Experimental Setup
All experiments were conducted on a local machine. The LACP-compliant server endpoints were
implemented using Python 3.11 with the Flask web framework. Cryptographic operations utilized the
python-jose library, and high-performance JSON processing was handled by orjson. The client-
side test harnesses were custom Python scripts using the requests library. For the interoperability
test, we used the langchain library (version 0.1.20).
A.2
Experiment 1: Performance and Overhead Analysis
Objective: To quantify the latency and payload size overhead of LACP compared to a standard,
non-secured RESTful API communication baseline.
Methodology: We developed a benchmark script that sent 10,000 sequential requests to two different
server endpoints:
1. Baseline Endpoint: A standard Flask route accepting a JSON payload via HTTP POST.
2. LACP Endpoint: A route accepting a JWS-signed LACP message. It performs crypto-
graphic signature verification before processing the payload.
We tested this across three payload sizes to simulate a range of agent interactions, using our optimized
LACP implementation (shortened keys, ECDSA signatures).
• Small (51 Bytes): Simulating a simple ACK or heartbeat message.
• Medium (151 Bytes): Simulating a basic tool call with a few parameters.
• Large (1,964 Bytes): Simulating a complex message, such as a detailed plan for a robotic
arm with multiple steps and coordinates.
Results: The performance analysis reveals a clear trend: LACP’s relative overhead is inversely
proportional to the complexity and size of the agent message. The results are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Performance and Overhead Analysis of LACP vs. Baseline REST.
Payload Scenario
Baseline Size
LACP Size
Size Overhead (%)
Baseline Latency
LACP Latency
Latency Overhead (%)
Small (51B)
51 bytes
306 bytes
+500%
0.85 ms
0.88 ms
+3.5%
Medium (151B)
151 bytes
442 bytes
+191%
0.86 ms
0.89 ms
+3.1%
Large (1,964B)
1,964 bytes
2,560 bytes
+30%
0.89 ms
0.92 ms
+2.9%
Discussion: The results strongly indicate LACP’s feasibility for real-world applications. The latency
overhead is minimal across all scenarios, with an absolute increase of only 0.03ms for large, complex
tasks. The payload size overhead, while significant for trivial messages, shrinks to a modest and
justifiable +30% for realistic payloads. This represents the necessary cost for verifiable, end-to-end
cryptographic security and is a reasonable trade-off for the guarantees LACP provides.
A.3
Experiment 2: Interoperability Demonstration
Objective: To provide a concrete demonstration of LACP’s ability to enable seamless communication
between an agent built on a major framework and a framework-agnostic tool.
Methodology: We constructed a two-part system:
1. LACP Tool Server: A standalone Flask server exposing a single endpoint. This server
hosted a simple "calculator" tool and was configured to only accept and respond with valid,
signed LACP messages.
7

2. LangChain Agent Client: A standard ReAct agent was implemented using the LangChain
library. We equipped it with a custom tool where the underlying function did not execute
logic locally. Instead, its sole purpose was to construct and send a signed LACP ACT message
to the tool server.
The experimental flow was as follows: The LangChain agent was given a prompt requiring calculation.
Its reasoning process triggered the custom tool, which sent the ACT message. The server verified,
executed, and returned the result in a signed OBSERVE message. The agent’s tool then verified this
response and passed the result to the agent’s Observation field to complete the reasoning loop.
Results: The experiment was successful. The LangChain agent was able to transparently use the
external, framework-agnostic tool, completing its task correctly. The entire interaction was secured
and structured by LACP without requiring any custom integration code on the server specific to the
LangChain framework.
Discussion: This experiment provides a practical blueprint for solving the N² integration problem
that currently fragments the agent ecosystem. It validates that the PLAN/ACT/OBSERVE schema is
a practical fit for the operational logic of modern agent frameworks and that LACP can serve as a
universal communication bridge.
A.4
Experiment 3: Security Validation
Objective: To empirically demonstrate that LACP’s Transactional Layer provides critical, application-
layer security guarantees that are not covered by transport-layer security (TLS) alone.
Methodology: We implemented an attack simulator script that targeted our LACP server endpoint
with two common application-layer attack vectors.
A.4.1
Tampering Attack
• Setup: The script generated a valid, signed LACP message for a hypothetical financial
transaction to transfer an amount of 100.
• Action: Before sending, the script programmatically altered the payload content after it
had been signed, changing the amount to 10000 while keeping the original, now-invalid,
signature.
• Observable Outcome: Upon receiving the tampered message, the server’s cryptographic
verification step immediately failed. The server logged a signature mismatch error and
returned an HTTP 403 Forbidden status code, preventing the fraudulent transaction.
A.4.2
Replay Attack
• Setup: The script sent a legitimate, valid LACP message, which the server processed
successfully. The server was configured to track the transaction_id of all processed
messages.
• Action: The script then immediately re-sent the exact same valid message.
• Observable Outcome: The server’s signature verification passed, but its Transactional
Layer logic identified the transaction_id as a duplicate. The server rejected the request
and returned an HTTP 409 Conflict status code, preventing the double-processing of the
operation.
Discussion: These experiments provide a definitive, practical answer to the question "Why not just
TLS?". They demonstrate that LACP is not redundant but essential for protecting against attacks that
occur after TLS decryption at an endpoint. The signature verification provides end-to-end message
integrity, while the tracking of transaction IDs ensures idempotency, both of which are crucial for
building trustworthy, high-stakes multi-agent systems.
8

B
LACP Protocol Example
Figure 3 demonstrates LACP’s layer-by-layer message: a semantic PLAN payload is wrapped by a
signed, two-phase-commit envelope and then by a binary transport frame, yielding a secure, reliable,
and interoperable message path that scales to complex multi-agent systems.
// (1) Semantic layer
{  "type": "plan",
  "intent_id": "move_object_plan_1",
  "role": "planner-agent",
  "natural_language": "Move object from A to B",
  "graph_ops": [
   { "op": "grasp", "args": {"from": "A"} },
   { "op": "move",  "args": {"to":  "B"} },
   { "op": "release" }
  ]
}
// (2) Transactional layer
{  "transaction_id": "tx-28a9ef",
  "sequence_num": 42,
  "timestamp": "2025-05-13T10:15:30Z",
  "source_agent": "planner-agent",
  "target_agent": "robot-controller",
  "payload": /* semantic object above */,
  "signature": "<base64url-ed25519>",
  "timeout_ms": 5000
}
// (3) Transport frame header
[0x00 0x2F ...]
<transactional message as binary>
[0xAD 0xDE]      // frame checksum
Figure 3: Layer-by-layer encoding of a PLAN message in LACP. (1) the bare semantic payload, (2) the
same payload wrapped by the transactional layer with a JSON Web Signature, and (3) the truncated
binary transport frame.
C
Protocol Comparison Analysis
Table 4: Feature support in existing agent-communication proposals.
Feature
Functions call
Agent Protocol
MCP
A2A
Agora
LACP
Cross-framework interoperability
◦
•
•
•
•
•
Multi-agent coordination
×
◦
◦
•
•
•
Layered architecture
×
×
•
◦
◦
•
End-to-end message signing
×
×
◦
•
◦
•
Transaction guarantees
×
◦
×
◦
•
•
Retry/timeout mechanisms
×
◦
◦
◦
◦
•
Independence from specific LLM
×
•
•
•
•
•
×: Not supported, ◦: Partially supported, •: Supported
Contemporary agent communication protocols, while addressing specific use cases, fail to simulta-
neously deliver the four pillars essential for production-grade multi-agent systems: comprehensive
cross-framework interoperability, explicit multi-agent coordination, mandatory cryptographic secu-
rity, and robust transaction guarantees. Table 4 demonstrates this critical limitation—no existing
protocol provides comprehensive support across all dimensions, creating systematic vulnerabilities
that compound in safety-critical deployments.
9

D
Alternative Views & Rebuttals
The proposal to standardize LLM agent communication via LACP invites critical assessment. We
proactively address anticipated objections:
Objection 1: Standardization will stifle innovation.
Rebuttal: LACP standardizes foundational communication primitives—syntax, transactional integrity,
security—not core agent intelligence or learning algorithms. Analogous to TCP/IP’s role in fostering
internet innovation, LACP aims to provide a stable, interoperable substrate. By abstracting essential
reliability and security concerns to the protocol level, LACP liberates resources for innovation in
higher-order agent functionalities and application-specific logic, consistent with the need for protocols
that enable, rather than restrict, capability evolution.
Objection 2: The semantic diversity of agent tasks precludes a unified grammar.
Rebuttal: LACP employs the “narrow waist” architectural principle, analogous to the internet protocol
suite. It standardizes a minimal set of essential message types (e.g., PLAN, ACT, OBSERVE) and
interaction patterns, while deliberately remaining agnostic to payload content. This design allows
diverse domain-specific semantics and complex data structures to be embedded within standard-
ized message envelopes, thereby balancing interoperability with the requisite flexibility for varied
application scenarios.
Objection 3: Additional protocol overhead will degrade performance, particularly in latency-
sensitive applications.
Rebuttal: LACP’s design inherently considers performance, a critical evaluation dimension for agent
protocols. The use of efficient binary encodings, modern transport protocols (e.g., QUIC, HTTP/2),
and header compression techniques can substantially mitigate transmission overhead. We project
that the overhead attributable to LACP’s transactional and security features will be marginal relative
to the significant improvements in communication reliability, security, and interoperability. This
modest performance cost is particularly justified in safety-critical applications where correctness and
verifiability are paramount.
Objection 4: Existing agent frameworks and their proprietary protocols offer adequate com-
munication solutions.
Rebuttal: Current frameworks, while valuable, often present ecosystem-specific or incomplete com-
munication mechanisms, as detailed in Table 1 and Section 2. They frequently lack comprehensive
end-to-end security, robust transactional integrity for complex multi-step operations, or true cross-
framework interoperability without substantial custom integration. LACP is conceptualized to address
these identified critical deficiencies, potentially integrating as a foundational layer to augment, rather
than merely replace, existing systems.
E
Extended History of Telecom Protocol Evolution
Protocols in wireless communication are the invisible contracts that let billions of radios share
spectrum, identify one another, and negotiate Quality of Service (QoS). They differ from isolated
hardware breakthroughs in that, once a rule set is adopted, every additional user or device deepens
the network’s value, creating a positive-feedback loop of interoperability, scale, and economic impact.
From spark-gap transmitters to the emerging International Mobile Telecommunications-2030 (IMT-
2030) vision, each protocol generation has arrived precisely when the previous rules could no longer
unlock the next order of societal benefit.
From Marconi’s spark-gap experiments in 1895 to the proliferation of Amplitude-Modulation and
Frequency-Modulation (AM/FM) broadcasting in the 1930s, wireless links functioned as largely self-
contained point-to-point systems. Message formats were improvised, spectrum was treated as private
acreage, and interference was mitigated chiefly through geographic separation. A first, tentative
move toward codified coordination came with the 1906 International Radiotelegraph Convention,
which standardised station identifiers and adopted a universal distress call but offered little additional
guidance; nonetheless, it proved that trans-border governance was feasible. For the next half-century,
the ether remained virtually protocol-empty. A genuine system perspective emerged only after large-
scale propagation campaigns—most notably those by Okumura—were distilled into closed-form
path-loss expressions, and the subsequent 1980 formalisation of these data as the Hata model Hata
[2013] provided engineers with a quantitative slide rule for planning frequency-reusable small cells.
10

This analytical lens opened the way for dedicated cellular control channels and, ultimately, for the
layered protocol stacks that characterise modern mobile networks.
1G—Channelised Voice.
Quantitative propagation models such as the Hata formulation provided
the first system-level insight that radio spectrum could be reused aggressively Bernhardt [1987],
and this analytic foundation precipitated the first generation (1G) of analogue cellular networks.
Early systems—most notably the Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS) and the Nordic Mobile
Telephone (NMT) network defined in Telecommunications Industry Association Standard (TIA) 553
MacDonald [1979] —shared a common control channel implemented as a narrow-band frequency-
shift keying (FSK) stream carrying three message types: ORIGINATION, PAGE RESPONSE, and
HANDOFF. This concise signalling grammar satisfied the era’s central requirement of seamless
city-wide mobility within tight frequency-reuse clusters and demonstrated that automated hand-off
could accommodate a rapidly growing subscriber base Lee [1989].
The analogue architecture, however, exposed serious weaknesses. Conversations were transmitted as
unencrypted FM audio, roaming identity was absent, and capacity was constrained by fixed guard
bands that grew ever more expensive as handset density increased; eavesdropping required little more
than a consumer scanner. These limitations drove the transition to digital second-generation (2G)
protocols.
2G—Digital Identity and Security.
Digital second-generation (2G) systems were designed explicitly to eliminate the three vulnerabilities
of the analogue era—clear-text audio, weak identity management, and rigid spectrum utilisation—and
to support the rising expectation that mobile phones should work across national borders. The Global
System for Mobile Communications (GSM) replaced frequency-modulated speech with full-rate
and half-rate vocoders surrounded by convolutional coding and cyclic redundancy checks, then
applied stream ciphers derived from a per-session challenge–response procedure Gerstlauer et al.
[2000]. Subscriber credentials moved from handset firmware to a removable Subscriber Identity
Module (SIM), enabling both secure roaming and mass-market prepaid services. A Time-Division
Multiple-Access (TDMA) frame with eight slots compressed eight encrypted calls into the bandwidth
that one analogue conversation had occupied, increasing spectral efficiency by nearly an order of
magnitude. Interim Standard 95 (IS-95) pursued the same goals with direct-sequence Code-Division
Multiple Access (CDMA), spreading each user’s signal across the full carrier and achieving soft
capacity that grew with signal-to-interference ratio. Although conceived only as control-plane text,
GSM’s mobile-originated short-message procedure was quickly commercialised as the 160-character
Short Message Service (SMS), illustrating how richer signalling grammars could spawn unanticipated
revenue streams and setting a precedent for the data-centric evolutions that would define the third
generation.
3G—State Machines for Soft Handover.
Although 2G systems such as GSM and IS-95 multiplied spectral efficiency and introduced ciphered
speech, they remained voice-centric, circuit-switched, and locked to kilobit-per-second data rates. The
rapid uptake of laptops and early smartphones exposed those limits and motivated a new air interface
capable of packet-switched megabit throughput. This requirement defined the third generation (3G)
under the International Mobile Telecommunications-2000 (IMT-2000) umbrella.
The Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) adopted Wideband Code Division
Multiple Access (WCDMA) on a 5 MHz carrier and inserted a Radio Network Controller (RNC)
between the base station and the core. Variable-rate convolutional and turbo coding, together
with 1,500-Hz-cycle power-control commands, maintained link quality in dense urban multipath,
while soft handover allowed a handset to combine energy from multiple cells Holma and Toskala
[2005]. Because these techniques could not be expressed with the GSM Layer-3 grammar, the Third
Generation Partnership Project specified a four-state Radio Resource Control (RRC) machine in TS
25.331 and introduced new primitives such as MEASUREMENT_REPORT, ACTIVE_SET_UPDATE, and
high-frequency scheduling commands. Handover logic migrated to the handset, enabling data rates
above 1 Mb/s and permitting applications to adapt radio requirements in real time. These protocol
advances completed the transition from voice-first mobility to data-driven connectivity and set the
stage for the orthogonal-frequency-division-multiple-access Long-Term Evolution (LTE) architecture
that would follow in the fourth generation (4G).
11

4G—Bearer Abstraction and All-IP Core.
Even with WCDMA’s megabit-class links, third-generation networks remained spectrum-constrained
because spreading codes were finite and the uplink and downlink shared a coupled bandwidth that
limited scheduling agility. These constraints set the stage for the 4G, formalised as Long-Term
Evolution (LTE).
LTE replaced code-division multiplexing with Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access
(OFDMA) on the downlink Yin and Alamouti [2006] and Single-Carrier Frequency-Division Multiple
Access (SC-FDMA) on the uplink, while embracing multi-stream Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
(MIMO) antenna processing Paulraj et al. [2004]. Together, these techniques tripled spectral efficiency
without requiring additional spectrum and lifted peak user rates far beyond the reach of 3G. The
architectural breakthrough, however, lay higher in the stack: the Evolved Packet System (EPS) bearer
specified in 3GPP TS 36.300. Because both the control plane (using Diameter for policy) and the
user plane (using GPRS Tunnelling Protocol–User, GTP-U) carried pure IP, application developers
could count on predictable latency and bandwidth. These features, documented succinctly in Raj
Jain’s “Introduction to LTE” notes, enabled voice, video, and data to converge on an all-IP core and
catalysed the mobile-app economy years before massive-MIMO hardware became commonplace.
5G—Service-Based Architecture.
While 4G LTE unified voice, video, and data on an all-IP core, it struggled to meet the emerging
demands of ultra-low latency, massive IoT, and immersive applications. To address these limitations,
3GPP introduced the fifth generation (5G) with New Radio (NR), formalised in TR 38.913. It
defined a tri-polar service model—enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency
Communications (URLLC), and massive Machine-Type Communications (mMTC)—alongside
flexible subcarrier numerologies and beam-centric massive MIMO Larsson et al. [2014].
Beyond the air interface, 5G’s core network (TS 23.501/502) adopted a service-based architecture,
replacing rigid LTE signalling with microservices exposed via HTTP/2 and JSON. Sessions now
carry explicit QoS profiles tied to eMBB, URLLC, or mMTC needs, enabling true network slicing.
Recent releases extend this model to non-terrestrial networks, Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces
(RIS), and native AI integration, positioning 5G not just as a faster pipe but as a programmable spatial
platform Huang et al. [2019].
6G—Protocols for Distributed Cognition.
Building on the service-centric flexibility of 5G, the sixth generation (6G) envisions a leap from
connectivity to distributed cognition. The ITU-R IMT-2030 framework outlines a new protocol
vocabulary to support this shift: symbol-level beam tracking for sub-terahertz channels, joint commu-
nication–sensing pilots that unify radar and data functions, and federated learning primitives such
as MODEL_REGISTER and GRADIENT_PUSH for on-device intelligence coordination. While hardware
prototypes already demonstrate 100 Gb/s links at 140 GHz, such capabilities remain confined to the
lab without standardised signalling to govern when, why, and how each node should act.
As with every generation before, physical breakthroughs alone are not enough. True scale and societal
impact emerge only when those breakthroughs are encoded into shared protocols. From analogue
control tones to JSON APIs and now AI-native message exchanges, wireless systems evolve by
teaching radios to speak a richer language of coordination.
Seen in sequence, each protocol generation has delivered a specific new capability—mobility, digital
security, mobile internet, all-IP convergence, service slicing, intelligent surfaces—that unlocked a
fresh wave of economic and social value while postponing spectrum exhaustion. The lesson is clear:
continued protocol research is not a peripheral activity but the core enabler of every subsequent
hardware advance. Without new rule sets to orchestrate spectrum, topology, and compute, future
breakthroughs in terahertz silicon, satellite constellations, or AI accelerators will remain islands of
potential rather than the next shared infrastructure Letaief et al. [2019], Anthropic [2024], Azari et al.
[2022].
12
