Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12:4
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-025-02096-0
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Leveraging multi-agent framework for root cause analysis
Feng Fu1
· Hong Ding1 · Yong Qin1 · Jian Yu1 · Dechao Xu1
Received: 20 June 2025 / Accepted: 5 September 2025 / Published online: 6 November 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
RCA is critical for operational stability in complex integrated systems, such as cloud-native platforms and distributed power
metering infrastructures. However, achieving automated RCA faces three fundamental challenges: (1) the complex mapping
between anomalies and runtime data, (2) the semantic gap between unstructured logs and structured metrics, and (3) combi-
natorial explosion of causal relationships for inferring the root causes. While LLMs offer potential for automated RCA due to
their superior reasoning and knowledge-linking capabilities, their susceptibility to hallucinations constrains practical deploy-
ment. Speciﬁcally, prevailing single-agent architectures exacerbate error propagation and context-switching failures during
multi-step RCA reasoning, leading to incorrect root cause identiﬁcation. To address these limitations, we propose MA-RCA
(multi-agent root cause analysis), a collaborative framework deploying specialized agents for distinct subtasks. Each agent
operates within a dedicated domain to minimize context-switching failures. Crucially, to counteract hallucinations and error
propagation, MA-RCA introduces two agents: a Retrieval Agent that grounds hypotheses in external domain knowledge (e.g.,
historical documentation) using retrieval-augmented generation, and a Validation Agent that veriﬁes hypotheses by executing
dynamic tests against runtime data. Experimental evaluations on cloud-native platforms (Nezha, 95.2% F1) and distributed
power metering infrastructures (82.8% F1) demonstrate the effectiveness of MA-RCA in automating multi-domain RCA,
bridging intelligent computing with complex system resilience through agent collaboration.
Keywords Root cause analysis · Complex systems diagnostics · Multi-agent framework · Large language models
Abbreviations
RCA
Root cause analysis
LLMs
Large language models
SREs
Site reliability engineers
IEC
InternationalElectrotechnicalCommission
TTL
Time-to-live
LSH
Locality-sensitive hashing
KPIs
Key performance indicators
CoT
Chain-of-thought
RAG
Retrieval-augmented generation
NLP
Natural language processing
Introduction
RCA serves as a cornerstone of operational reliability in
complex distributed systems, particularly in cloud-based
B Feng Fu
fufeng6688@hotmail.com
1
NARI-TECH Nanjing Control Systems Ltd, Nanjing 210003,
China
platforms [21, 35] and distributed power metering infrastruc-
tures [18, 23] where transient anomalies (e.g., microservice
failures, malware or voltage sags) can trigger cascading
outages within minutes [3, 8, 12]. Traditional RCA predom-
inantly relies on manual expertise: SREs leverage domain
knowledge and personal experience to deduce potential
causes from anomalous reports and symptoms (e.g., logs,
metrics, traces). However, cultivating experienced SREs
entails signiﬁcant time investments. Furthermore, as system
complexity increases, the exponential growth of telemetry
data across multi-modal logs, service dependency graphs,
and resource metrics makes human-driven analysis increas-
ingly impractical [10, 17, 32, 34]. These limitations under-
score an urgent need for automated RCA solutions, which
could reason over ephemeral failure modes with minimal
human intervention.
The manual RCA process typically involves three sequen-
tial steps [24]: (1) determining necessary supplementary data
based on anomalies (e.g., alerts), guided by domain exper-
tise and personal experience; (2) gathering targeted evidence
from logs, traces, and operational repositories; (3) corre-
123

4
Page 2 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
lating collected data with anomalies to infer root causes
through systematic examination. To automate this workﬂow
faces three fundamental challenges: (1) the complex map-
ping between anomalies and runtime data; (2) the semantic
gap between unstructured logs and structured metrics; (3)
combinatorial explosion of causal relationships for infer-
ring the root causes. Early approaches [9, 16, 36] employed
rule-based and statistical heuristics (e.g., decision trees, cor-
relation analysis) to directly map symptoms to root causes,
bypassingdynamicdatacollectionandanalysis.Thisstrategy
prone to failure in complex environments due to oversim-
pliﬁed causality assumptions. Subsequent machine learning
methods [15, 30] and deep learning methods [27] introduced
multi-modal runtime data (e.g., logs, traces, topology) for
causal inference. Yet, these techniques exhibited limited gen-
eralizability and relied heavily on high-quality training data,
which is often scarce in production scenarios [5].
The emergence of LLMs has demonstrated exceptional
reasoning capabilities and knowledge-linking capacities [13,
22, 25, 29]. These models can understand and parse both
unstructured and structured data, uncovering causal rela-
tionships across heterogeneous sources, which naturally
align with the requirements of automating RCA. Pioneer-
ing work [1] ﬁne-tunes LLMs to generate root causes
directly from anomaly titles and descriptions, demonstrating
signiﬁcant potential in RCA accuracy. To achieve end-to-
end automation, RCACOPILOT [4] leverages predeﬁned
handlers for data collection followed by LLM-based anal-
ysis. However, manually conﬁgured handlers lack ﬂexibility
to adapt to dynamic system topologies. Innovations like
REACT [24] and RCAgent [28] propose LLM-based agents
to autonomously select tools for data gathering and analysis.
Notwithstanding these advances, the hallucinations prob-
lem of LLMs impede practical deployment, where agents
generate plausible but ungrounded causal hypotheses. To
mitigate hallucinations, mABC [33] draws inspiration from
blockchain consensus mechanisms, employing multi-agent
voting to reduce the reliance on single-agent decisions.
However, this method requires each agent to indepen-
dently execute the full RCA workﬂow, neglecting hallucina-
tions induced by context-switching across disparate domain
knowledge during multi-step reasoning. Furthermore, the
absence of historical diagnostic experience leads agents to
overlook critical clues or collect irrelevant data, exacerbat-
ing hallucination risks.
To address the aforementioned limitations, in this paper,
we propose MA-RCA (multi-agent root cause analysis), a
collaborative framework deploying specialized agents for
distinct subtasks. Following the manual RCA pipeline,
MA-RCA assigns dedicated agents to data analysis, run-
time data collection, hypothesis generation and validation,
and report generation. By coordinating task allocation with
an RCA Agent, each agent operates within a dedicated
domain, minimizing context-switching error propagation
during multi-step reasoning. Crucially, to counteract the
scarcity of actionable information in anomaly alerts, MA-
RCA introduces a Retrieval Agent. This agent grounds
hypotheses in historical diagnostic experience and domain
knowledge, thereby expanding the hypothesis space and
uncovering latent indicators for validation. Subsequently,
a Validation Agent employs dynamic testing tools to ver-
ify hypotheses against runtime data, effectively suppressing
hallucinations and cascading errors. Comprehensive evalua-
tions across cloud-native platforms (Nezha [31]) and power
metering datasets validate the superiority of our proposed
MA-RCA. Speciﬁcally, MA-RCA achieves 95.8% accuracy
(F1 = 0.952) on Nezha and 84.3% accuracy (F1 = 0.828) on
the Power monitoring dataset, outperforming single-agent
baselines by a large margin.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
– To counteract LLM hallucinations induced by context-
switching during multi-step RCA reasoning, we propose
a multi-agent framework deploying specialized agents
for distinct subtasks. Each agent operates within a dedi-
cated domain, minimizing context switching and reduc-
ing hallucination risks.
– To mitigate error propagation between agents, we intro-
duceexternalhistoricaldiagnosticexperienceanddomain
knowledge. This grounds hypotheses in veriﬁed evi-
dence, thereby expanding the hypothesis space and
uncovering latent indicators for further validation.
– Extensive experiments on two datasets demonstrate that
our proposed MA-RCA could achieve the best perfor-
mance among all the baselines.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: “Related
work” introduces the related work on traditional and LLM-
based RCA methods; “Method” describes the four main
agents (RCA Agent, Retrieval Agent, Validation Agent,
and Report Agent) of the proposed MA-RCA framework;
“Evaluation” reports the extensive experimental results on
two datasets, including ablation studies and performance
comparisons; “System illustration” describes the intelligent
diagnosis system for real-world power metering infras-
tructures deploying MA-RCA; and “Conclusions” provides
the conclusions, summarizing the contributions and future
research directions.
Related work
Traditional RCA
RCA is critical for maintaining operational stability in com-
plex integrated systems, yet it remains a time-intensive
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 3 of 13
4
process in system maintenance workﬂows. Traditional RCA
depends heavily on manual expertise from SREs. How-
ever, training experienced SREs requires several years,
creating scalability challenges as systems grow more com-
plex and deployments expand [1]. This reliance on human
experts slows response times and leads to inconsistent diag-
noses, especially when facing unprecedented failures or
staff changes. To address these limitations, early automated
approaches [9, 16, 36] employed rule-based systems and sta-
tistical heuristics to directly map symptom descriptions to
root causes. While effective in static homogeneous environ-
ments, these methods fail in complex systems where a single
anomaly manifestation may stem from diverse underlying
factors (e.g., concurrent hardware faults and conﬁguration
errors). Subsequently, machine learning [11, 15, 19, 30] and
deep learning [2, 20, 27] methods were developed to incor-
porate multi-modal runtime data (e.g., logs, metrics, traces),
establishing causal mappings between anomalies and root
causes through data-driven inference. However, these tech-
niques exhibit limited generalization capability due to their
dependence on high-quality labeled datasets, which are chal-
lenging to acquire in production environments (e.g., sparse
fault labels in power grids).
LLM-based RCA
Automating RCA necessitates addressing three core chal-
lenges derived from manual SREs workﬂows: (1) the com-
plex mapping between anomaly descriptions and runtime
data, (2) the semantic gap between unstructured logs and
structured metrics, and (3) the combinatorial explosion
of causal relationships when inferring root causes. LLMs
offer potential solutions due to their exceptional capabil-
ities in processing heterogeneous data, logical reasoning,
and knowledge linking. Pioneering method [1] proposed
ﬁne-tunes LLMs on domain-speciﬁc datasets to generate
root causes directly from incident titles and descriptions.
While demonstrating initial promise, these approaches face
scalability limitations: collecting high-quality training data
for complex systems is challenging, and continuous model
retraining becomes infeasible for state-of-the-art LLMs
as systems evolve. To circumvent ﬁne-tuning, Chen et
al. [4] proposed predeﬁned handlers for data collection,
followed by LLM-based analysis. However, static handlers
lack adaptability to dynamic system topologies. Subsequent
frameworks like REACT [24] introduced tool-augmented
agents for autonomous data gathering, while RCAgent [28]
deployed LLM-based agents for end-to-end RCA task plan-
ning. Despite achieving workﬂow automation, these methods
suffer from LLM hallucinations, where agents generate plau-
sible but ungrounded causal hypotheses. To mitigate this,
inspired by blockchain consensus, mABC [33] adopted
multi-agent voting to reduce reliance on single-agent deci-
sions. Crucially, mABC requires each agent to independently
execute the full RCA workﬂow, thereby neglecting hallu-
cinations induced by context-switching during multi-step
reasoning (e.g., transitioning from log parsing to dependency
analysis). Furthermore, the absence of historical diagnostic
experienceleadsagentstocollectirrelevantdata,overwhelm-
ing LLM context windows and diluting critical evidence.
This data noise ampliﬁes hallucination risks and impedes
practical deployment in mission-critical systems like cloud
platforms or power grids.
To counteract hallucinations in LLMs during RCA, we
propose MA-RCA, a framework leveraging a multi-agent
architecture that decomposes the RCA workﬂow into spe-
cialized subtasks. Each agent operates within a dedicated
domain, thereby minimizing context switching and reducing
error propagation across reasoning steps. Concurrently, his-
torical diagnostic experience is integrated to guide agents to
expanding the hypothesis space and uncovering latent indi-
cators for further validation. This dual mechanism, the agent
specialization and the knowledge grounding, could effec-
tively suppresses hallucinations.
Method
As illustrated in Fig 1, the proposed MA-RCA framework
supports industrial anomaly diagnosis via a modular and
collaborative architecture. It integrates four core intelli-
gent agents: the RCA Agent, Retrieval Agent, Validation
Agent, and Report Agent. These agents operate in con-
junction with a historical anomaly case repository and a
tool repository, enabling automated and context-aware fault
resolution in dynamic environments. Unlike single agent-
based approaches, MA-RCA decomposes RCA workﬂows
into specialized tasks. Each task is assigned to a dedi-
cated agent equipped with domain-speciﬁc tools and tailored
LLM capabilities. This structure reduces error propagation,
thereby overcoming hallucinations of single-agent systems.
The following sections elaborate on the design principles and
operational mechanisms of each component.
RCA Agent
As the central orchestrator of the multi-agent diagnostic
framework, the RCA Agent executes three critical functions:
(1) semantic parsing of unstructured anomaly reports, (2)
coordination of distributed diagnostic workﬂows, and (3)
probabilistic synthesis of root cause hypotheses. The agent
processes user queries through a prompt-engineered pipeline
that ﬁrst extracts structured diagnostic parameters (device
ID, anomaly type, temporal context), then initiates evidence-
driven investigation workﬂows, and ﬁnally applies causal
reasoning over multi-source ﬁndings. Its decision-making
123

4
Page 4 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Fig. 1 The overview of our
proposed MA-RCA, a
collaborative framework
deploying specialized agents for
distinct subtasks. It integrates
four core intelligent agents: the
RCA Agent, Retrieval Agent,
Validation Agent, and Report
Agent. These agents operate in
conjunction with a historical
anomaly case repository and a
tool repository, enabling
automated and context-aware
fault resolution in dynamic
environments
architecture combines deterministic pattern matching with
probabilistic association mining, enabling systematic navi-
gation through historical precedents and real-time telemetry
data.
Input parsing mechanism
In RCA systems, robust input parsing forms the founda-
tional layer for ensuring diagnostic validity. The anomaly
input submitted by SREs, typically unstructured (e.g., “Meter
[METER ID] experienced sudden voltage drop during
the afternoon”), presents three key processing challenges:
semantic ambiguity, informational redundancy, and termino-
logical heterogeneity. Direct processing of such raw inputs
risks propagating error accumulation through subsequent
retrieval and veriﬁcation phases.
To mitigate error propagation in downstream diagnostic
workﬂows, our framework implements strict entity extrac-
tion across four mandatory parameters, including device
type (e.g., energy meter, sensor), symptom (e.g., voltage
loss, communication failure), device ID (exact hardware
identiﬁer), and timeframe (temporal context). This method-
ology not only resolves linguistic ambiguities in natural
language descriptions (e.g., distinguishing between transient
voltage sags and sustained under-voltage conditions) but also
enables implicit association recognition (such as identifying
known defect patterns speciﬁc to particular device models),
thereby achieving dual optimization of recall rate in histor-
ical case retrieval and operational precision in veriﬁcation
task scheduling.
As illustrated in Fig 2, the parsing module enforces com-
pleteness checks prior to Retrieval Agent invocation. For
incomplete inputs, a closed-loop validation protocol triggers
user requery with explicit missing parameter notiﬁcations
(e.g., “Missing required ﬁelds: [device_id, timeframe]”).
This protocol ensures information ﬁdelity and semantic con-
sistency during subsequent knowledge retrieval processes.
Agent scheduling
Effective anomaly diagnosis necessitates the orchestration of
heterogeneous tasks including historical experience retrieval,
real-time data validation, and professional report generation,
which exceeds the capability of single-function modules.
As the core scheduling hub of the multi-agent collaborative
framework, the RCA Agent implements a dynamic deci-
sion engine to coordinate the temporal execution logic and
information exchange among the Retrieval Agent, Validation
Agent, and Report Agent through the following workﬂow:
– Historical pattern matching: Leveraging parsed enti-
ties (device identiﬁers, anomaly signatures, spatiotem-
poral contexts) to dispatch the Retrieval Agent for
querying historical case repositories and identifying anal-
ogous/relevant incidents;
– Real-time evidence veriﬁcation: Activating the Valida-
tion Agent to perform cross-validation between retrieved
patterns and current system telemetry;
– Causal synthesis & reporting: Coordinating the Report
Agent to generate diagnostic conclusions through prob-
abilistic fusion of validation results and historical root
cause associations.
Retrieval Agent
Conventional RCA methodologies relying on manual exper-
tise recollection or fragmented case repositories exhibit
inherent limitations of knowledge fragmentation and lim-
ited dynamic adaptability. When confronting complex sys-
tem failures, singular manifestations (e.g., “grid voltage
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 5 of 13
4
Fig. 2 The input parsing mechanism of RCA Agent, which enforces
structured extraction of critical entities from user queries. Valid inputs
generate complete outputs with null error ﬁelds, while missing entities
trigger explicit error messages listing omitted parameters. Examples
demonstrate both scenarios: a a valid query with all entities detected,
and b an invalid query prompting user re-entry due to incomplete device
ID and timeframe
sag”) often correlate with multidimensional potential root
causes (capacitor aging, harmonic distortion, or topological
anomalies). Manual analysis requiring exhaustive histori-
cal experience traversal coupled with subjective hypothesis
dependency frequently leads to diagnostic misinterpretations
or critical causal chain omissions. The proposed Retrieval
Agent addresses these limitations through a dual mechanism
of structured experience reuse and multi-modal causal infer-
ence, providing intelligent augmentation to the RCA Agent’s
hypothesis generation process. The whole workﬂow of our
Retrieval Agent is shown in Algorithm 1.
Case retrieval
The case retrieval module, designed with the core objective of
reusing historical experience, achieves precise cross-domain
and cross-temporal case matching through a hierarchical
indexing architecture. During the data preprocessing phase,
it implements multi-granular segmentation of historical case
repositories – partitioning technical documents according to
IEC standards and dividing operational records into time
windows – while constructing a hybrid vector space that
integrates textual semantic embeddings, temporal feature
encodings, and domain knowledge graph triples to estab-
lish symptom-root cause mappings. The retrieval process
employs a hybrid recall strategy combining keyword match-
ing (for exact retrieval of canonical cases like “voltage sag”)
with semantic expansion (covering variant descriptions such
Algorithm 1: The workﬂow of Retrieval Agent
input : The parsed parameters: symptom s, timeframe t, device
type d; The number N of required historical cases
output: The mapping M of root causes and symptoms
1 Initialize an empty set of historical cases H and an empty
mapping M ;
/* Case Retrieval
*/
2 Keyword matching: Retrieve historical cases with s and save to
H;
3 Semantic retrieval: Retrieve historical cases with the s and d, and
save to H ;
4 Re-rank the cases in H by the semantic similarity and time decay
;
5 Reserve the top-N cases from the ranked H ;
/* Root Cause Inversion
*/
6 for each case c in H do
7
Use LLM to parse the root cause r and symptoms S ;
8
Use LLM to abstract concrete symptoms into generalized
features and update S;
9
Use LLM to perform logical veriﬁcation and conﬂict
resolution and update S ;
10
Put r and S to the mapping M ;
11 end for
as “potential drop” through synonym libraries), followed by
cross-encoder reranking of Top-K candidate cases that pri-
oritizes temporal relevance weighting and domain-speciﬁc
ruleﬁltering(e.g.,excludingexternalinterferencefactorslike
lightning events).
123

4
Page 6 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Root cause inversion
The proposed root cause inversion mechanism addresses
two fundamental bottlenecks in conventional case retrieval:
symptom-root cause association gaps and insufﬁcient cover-
age of long-tail root causes, particularly critical in dynami-
cally evolving industrial ecosystems (e.g., power grid equip-
ment upgrades, healthcare process optimization). Historical
case repositories exhibit fragmented causal mappings where
single root causes (e.g., “capacitor aging” in web refer-
ence) manifest through diverse symptom patterns (12 distinct
voltage waveforms in power grid cases). Leveraging LLM-
powered semantic-driven reverse index construction and
multi-level causal generalization mechanisms, this module
transforms fragmented case-speciﬁc cause-symptom pairs
into interpretable, extensible causal knowledge units, gener-
ating structured inputs for efﬁcient retrieval and validation.
The core technical implementation is as follows:
– Reverse index construction: Employing LLMs for
semantic deconstruction of historical cases to extract
root cause entities (e.g., “capacitor aging”) and asso-
ciated symptom sets (voltage sag, harmonic distortion
rate >5%), and construct millisecond-response “cause
→symptoms” inverted indices;
– Symptom generalization mapping: Utilizing LLM
contextual reasoning to abstract concrete symptoms (e.g.,
“API latency >500ms”) into generalized features (net-
work I/O anomalies, computational resource contention),
establishing cross-scenario causal association rules;
– Dynamic causal knowledge integration: Performing
logicalveriﬁcationandconﬂictresolutionthroughdomain
knowledge graphs (e.g., IEC 62053 equipment failure
taxonomy), eliminating pseudo-associations violating
physical principles (e.g., invalid “lightning disaster →
ﬁrmware logic error” mappings).
Validation Agent
The Validation Agent systematically veriﬁes root cause
hypotheses through automated evidence integration and
cross-domain data correlation. Its core innovation lies in
converting manual diagnostic assumptions into quantiﬁable
validation tasks, addressing the inefﬁciency and subjectiv-
ity of traditional veriﬁcation methods. The workﬂow of this
module is shown as Algorithm 2.
Hypothesis Validation Protocol
The Hypothesis Validation Protocol transforms unstructured
diagnosticconjecturesintosystematicveriﬁcationworkﬂows
through three core technical innovations: automated task
deduplication, prioritized evidence collection, and dynamic
Algorithm 2: The workﬂow of Validation Agent
input : The mapping M of root causes and symptoms
output: 1. The matching score of each root cause hypothesis; 2.
Differences between historical cases and real-time
symptoms
1 Initialize an empty mapping Mr and a empty set of indicators I ;
2 for each root causes r in M do
3
Read the symptoms S of r in M ;
4
for each symptom s in S do
5
Use LLM to parse the indicator i of s ;
6
i →I ;
7
end for
8 end for
9 Remove duplicate indicators in I ;
10 for each indicator i in I do
11
Choose the corresponding tool to read the real-time data of i ;
12
Return the abnormal result of i ;
13 end for
14 Refer to M and construct the Mr with real-time results ;
15 for each root cause hypothesis r in Mr do
16
Read the corresponding real-time results R of r in Mr ;
17
Read the corresponding symptoms S of r in M ;
18
Use LLM to generate the descriptions of R and S ;
19
Use semantic similarity to compute the matching scores of
these two descriptions ;
20
Use LLM to generate the differences between these two
descriptions ;
21 end for
cache invalidation. This protocol addresses the compu-
tational overhead of validating concurrent hypotheses in
large-scale systems while ensuring veriﬁcation integrity.
Uponreceivingasetofcandidaterootcauses(e.g.,“capac-
itor aging” or “ﬁrmware defects”) from the RCA Agent, the
protocol initiates a three-phase veriﬁcation cycle. First, it
decomposes hypotheses into quantiﬁable validation metrics,
transforming “capacitor aging” into temperature thresholds
(>85°C), harmonic distortion levels (>5%), and capaci-
tance deviation (>15% from nominal values). These metrics
undergo similarity clustering using LSH, grouping overlap-
ping veriﬁcation requirements. For instance, both capacitor
aging and thermal runaway hypotheses might share tempera-
ture validation needs, triggering a single sensor data retrieval
operation.
Theprotocolthenorchestratestoolchainexecutionthrough
priority-aware scheduling. Critical real-time metrics like
CPU load or network latency receive immediate attention
through direct API calls to monitoring systems (Prometheus
for cloud infrastructure, Modbus/TCP for industrial con-
trollers), while background validations such as log analysis
or conﬁguration audits queue for batch processing. A dis-
tributed cache pool with TTL rules stores and shares results
across hypothesis threads—volatile metrics like ambient
temperature refresh every 30s, whereas stable parameters
like ﬁrmware versions persist for up to an hour. This dual-
layer optimization reduces redundant tool invocations in
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 7 of 13
4
cloud infrastructure trials while maintaining result consis-
tency compared to isolated validation processes.
Multi-source data convergence and conﬁdence scoring
To compute conﬁdence scores, the agent leverages semantic
alignment between historical symptom patterns and real-
time observations. LLMs transform structured data—such
as numerical metrics, log entries, or trace spans—into con-
textualized natural language descriptions. These descriptions
enable semantic similarity scoring using embedding models
(e.g., BERT), which quantify the alignment between real-
timeanomaliesandhistoricalfailuresignatures.Forexample,
a hypothesis linking “capacitor aging” to voltage sags is eval-
uated by comparing real-time voltage waveforms (sampled
at 10 Hz from PMUs) against historical degradation pat-
terns, while harmonic distortion metrics are validated against
thresholds derived from equipment speciﬁcations.
Context-aware data-to-text conversion with LLMs bridges
gaps between structured metrics and unstructured domain
knowledge. The validation cache pool optimizes perfor-
mance by reusing shared data across hypotheses, while
semantic similarity scoring replaces rigid threshold-based
rules, enhancing resilience to data variability. This func-
tionality not only automates hypothesis veriﬁcation but also
provides auditable evidence chains—critical for compliance-
driven industries.
Report Agent
The Report Agent serves as the uniﬁed output layer of
the multi-agent RCA framework, transforming raw diagnos-
tic data into structured reports for SREs and downstream
systems. By integrating historical case matches, real-time
validation metrics, and causal reasoning results, it generates
compliance-ready documentation with human interpretabil-
ity. The agent employs adaptive templates to organize
ﬁndings into standardized sections, such as Basic Situation
(summarizing anomaly context and system conﬁgurations),
Evidence Chain, and Mitigation Recommendations. For
instance, in a voltage anomaly scenario, the report high-
lights discrepancies between rated and measured voltages
(e.g., “threshold ratio < 0.9”) and suggests manual terminal
inspections or data revalidation.
To ensure interoperability, reports are exported in PDF
formats for audit trails and automated parsing. By automat-
ing these workﬂows, the Report Agent reduces manual report
generation time while adhering to industry standards like IEC
and NERC, ensuring both efﬁciency and regulatory compli-
ance.
Table 1 The statistics of Nezha dataset
TrainTicket
Resource
CPU contention
7
Network delay
14
Code
Error return
11
Code defects
13
OnlineBoutique
Resource
CPU contention
16
Network delay
16
CPU consumed
10
Code
Error return
7
Code defects
7
Evaluation
Datasets
To validate the effectiveness of our proposed MA-RCA, we
conduct comprehensive experiments on two datasets, which
are collected from real-world scenarios.
Nezha dataset [31] serves as a multi-modal observability
benchmark constructed from two open-source microser-
vice architectures: the OnlineBoutique e-commerce plat-
form and the TrainTicket railway reservation system. These
representative implementations model distinct cloud-native
operational patterns: OnlineBoutique encapsulates core e-
commerce transactions, whereas TrainTicket handles com-
plex ticketing workﬂows involving real-time inventory syn-
chronization and payment gateways. To mimic production-
level faults, two principal issues are injected across both
systems: resource issues (e.g., CPU contention, network
latency) and code defects (e.g., error return, exception code
defects). The fault distribution comprises 56 instances in
OnlineBoutique (42 resource, 14 code) and 45 instances in
TrainTicket (21 resource, 24 code), as detailed in Table 1.
To adapt this dataset for our proposed MA-RCA evalua-
tion, we implement a stratiﬁed partitioning strategy that pre-
serves fault-type distributions, allocating 50% of instances
per category for historical case construction and 50% for
evaluation. The Validation Agent operates on pre-processed
telemetry data (logs, metrics, traces) rather than live system
instrumentation, enabling deterministic reproducibility. We
speciﬁcally isolate key service-level indicators such as suc-
cess rates and CPU utilization metrics to simulate real-world
SREs diagnostic scenarios, where engineers typically initi-
ate RCA investigations based on singular observable metric
anomalies. This methodology establishes controlled exper-
imental conditions while maintaining operational relevance
to production debugging practices.
The Power monitoring dataset originates from power
meteringinfrastructure,providesvalidatedrootcause-symptom
correlations across two critical failure domains, as shown in
Table 2: (1) ICT Infrastructure Anomalies exhibit patterns of
123

4
Page 8 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
computational resource exhaustion (CPU throttling, memory
leakage), storage subsystem failures (disk I/O contention,
ﬁlesystem corruption), database connectivity breakdowns
(connection pool exhaustion, query deadlocks), and net-
work performance degradation (latency spikes, packet loss
anomalies); (2) Electrical System Faults encompass power
circuit abnormalities including short-circuit faults, open cir-
cuit faults, grounding faults, and electrical equipment faults.
The pre-processed method is similar to Nezha. Following
the above pre-process methodology in the Nezha dataset,
we implement identical preprocessing pipelines for tempo-
ral alignment and feature extraction across heterogeneous
data sources. This includes stratiﬁed partitioning of incident
records preserving fault-type distributions, synthetic genera-
tion of monitoring telemetry streams, and abstraction of KPIs
such as harmonic distortion levels and voltage sag character-
istics.
Baselines
We compare the proposed MA-RCA with three LLM-based
approaches:
– CoT implements structured reasoning decomposition
through explicit intermediate step generation [29]. Our
implementation combines the prompt with few-shot
exemplars from historical cases.
– RAG establishes knowledge grounding through seman-
tic retrieval from the vector database [6]. We leverage
MA-RCA’s historical case repository as the database and
employ cosine similarity-based retrieval of the top 5 most
contextually relevant cases for each input symptom pro-
ﬁle.
– RCACOPILOT represents workﬂow-driven diagnosis
integrating multi-source telemetry analysis [4]. We adapt
its predeﬁned diagnostic pipelines to our experimen-
tal context, maintaining original design principles for
log-trace-metric correlation and automated evidence col-
lection while aligning root cause taxonomies with our
evaluation framework.
– RCAgent [28] uses LLM-based agent to recursively
extract and summarize key details from logs and codes,
helping to identify the root causes of system failures.
– mABC[33]drawsinspirationfromblockchainconsensus
mechanisms, employing multi-agent voting to reduce the
reliance on single-agent decisions.
Given the classiﬁcation nature of our experimental setup,
we employ four principal evaluation metrics: Accuracy
measures overall prediction correctness across fault cate-
gories; Precision quantiﬁes class-speciﬁc prediction validity
bycomparingcorrectidentiﬁcationsagainsttotalpredictions;
Recall assesses detection completeness through the percent-
age of successfully identiﬁed true positives per fault class;
and F1-score provides balanced performance assessment via
harmonic mean integration of precision and recall.
Overall performance
As shown in Table 3, the experimental results demon-
strate the superiority of the proposed MA-RCA framework
across both evaluated domains: the cloud-native Nezha plat-
form and the power monitoring infrastructure. MA-RCA
achieves state-of-the-art performance, signiﬁcantly outper-
forming all baselines in accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1-score. The performance disparities highlight limitations
in existing approaches and validate the design choices under-
pinning our multi-agent system.
Conventional methods exhibit critical shortcomings. CoT
yields the lowest performance (F1 = 0.412 on Nezha; Acc =
0.117 on Power), underscoring the insufﬁciency of closed-
loop reasoning without external grounding. Its low precision,
particularly on the power dataset (Pre = 0.100), indicates
a propensity for generating unsubstantiated hypotheses.
RAG shows moderate improvement (Nezha F1 = 0.704) by
incorporating historical cases, yet its performance remains
constrained by semantic retrieval limitations. The reliance on
cosine similarity often returns textually similar but causally
irrelevant cases, failing to ensure diagnostic precision.
Workﬂow-driven and agent-based methods form a com-
petitive middle group. RCACOPILOT achieves respectable
results (Nezha F1 = 0.748) through predeﬁned data correla-
tion pipelines, but its inﬂexibility hinders adaptation to novel
or dynamic failure modes. RCAgent and mABC, employing
single and multi-agent paradigms respectively, demonstrate
comparable performance (Nezha F1 = 0.725 and F1 =
0.726). However, their architectures inherently propagate
errors. RCAgent suffers from context-switching hallucina-
tions within a single agent performing all tasks. While
mABC mitigates this via multi-agent voting, it requires each
agent to execute the entire workﬂow independently, thus
amplifying computational overhead without fundamentally
addressing grounding issues. All three methods share a crit-
ical weakness: they operate on a limited hypothesis space
derived solely from the immediate anomaly context, lacking
mechanisms to incorporate broader historical knowledge for
hypothesis expansion or validation.
The proposed MA-RCA framework addresses these limi-
tationsthroughaspecializedmulti-agentarchitecture,achiev-
ing superior performance (Nezha Acc = 0.958, F1 = 0.952;
Power Acc = 0.843, F1 = 0.828). Its superiority stems from
three pivotal design innovations. First, task decomposition
assigns specialized agents to discrete subtasks—retrieval,
analysis, validation, and reporting. This division of labor
minimizes context-switching and error propagation between
individuals. Second, the dedicated Retrieval Agent proac-
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 9 of 13
4
Table 2 The statistics of Power
monitoring dataset
ICT infrastructure
Computational resource
CPU throttling
10
Memory leakage
20
Storage system
Disk I/O contention
15
Filesystem corruption
6
Database
Connection pool exhaustion
30
Query deadlocks
11
Network
Latency spikes
20
Packet loss anomalies
19
Electrical system
Short-circuit faults
36
Open circuit faults
26
Grounding faults
22
Electrical equipment faults
16
Table 3 RCA results on Nezha
and Power monitoring dataset
Method
Nezha
Power monitoring
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
CoT
0.308
0.350
0.500
0.412
0.218
0.100
0.140
0.117
RAG
0.740
0.628
0.800
0.704
0.571
0.505
0.580
0.540
RCACOPILOT
0.745
0.721
0.777
0.748
0.643
0.681
0.623
0.651
RCAgent
0.740
0.650
0.820
0.725
0.580
0.550
0.640
0.591
mABC
0.742
0.680
0.780
0.726
0.600
0.580
0.650
0.613
MA-RCA (Ours)
0.958
0.960
0.944
0.952
0.843
0.827
0.830
0.828
tively queries a historical case repository. This critical step
grounds the subsequent reasoning process in veriﬁed evi-
dence and, more importantly, expands the initial hypothesis
space with latent indicators derived from past diagnoses,
countering the scarcity of information in raw alerts. Third,
the Validation Agent employs dynamic tools to test generated
hypotheses against runtime system data. This veriﬁcation
actively suppresses hallucinations and cascading errors,
ensuring only evidence-supported conclusions are ﬁnalized.
The observed performance gap between the two domains
further validates our approach. All methods perform better
on the Nezha dataset, likely due to more structured log-
ging and clearer causal pathways in cloud systems. The
power monitoring environment presents greater challenges,
including heterogeneous data sources and complex physical
interdependencies. MA-RCA still achieves large margin of
improvement on the power dataset underscores its ability to
handle domain-speciﬁc complexities through its knowledge-
guided and validation-driven architecture.
Ablation study
TosystematicallyevaluatethecontributionsofMA-RCA’s
modular components, we conduct an ablation study on
the Nezha (cloud-native) and Power Monitoring (cyber-
physical) datasets, designing four functionally degraded
variants (Table 4):
– w/o Multi-agent: A monolithic LLM architecture con-
solidates all RCA tasks – symptom parsing, historical
case retrieval, tool validation, and diagnosis – without
domain-specialized agents, exposing context-switching
overhead and error propagation risks;
– w/o Retrieval Agent: Deactivates the hybrid (key-
word+semantic) case retrieval and LLM-based causal
inversion, restricting diagnostic scope exclusively to real-
time telemetry and symptom descriptions while halting
historical knowledge integration;
– w/o Semantic retrieval: Restricts case retrieval to
keyword matching, eliminating LLM-driven semantic
expansion (e.g., synonym resolution, symptom abstrac-
tion) to quantify terminology generalization loss;
– w/o Validation Agent: Removes tool-mediated hypoth-
esis veriﬁcation (e.g., metric queries, physics-aware
checks), reducing the workﬂow to a RAG-based method
prone to unvalidated hallucinations.
On the Nezha dataset, the full MA-RCA framework
achieves near-perfect performance (Acc: 0.958, F1: 0.952),
demonstrating its robustness in handling service depen-
dency chains and real-time telemetry correlation. However,
ablating core components exposes severe degradation. The
w/o Multi-agent variant, which collapses the multi-agent
workﬂow into a monolithic LLM, suffers catastrophic per-
formance collapse (F1: 0.716 on Nezha, 0.680 on Power),
123

4
Page 10 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Table 4 Ablation study on
Nezha and Power monitoring
dataset
Method
Nezha
Power monitoring
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
w/o multi-agent
0.729
0.774
0.666
0.716
0.735
0.742
0.627
0.680
w/o Retrieval Agent
0.275
0.361
0.250
0.295
0.112
0.124
0.173
0.144
w/o semantic retrieval
0.902
0.892
0.856
0.874
0.716
0.685
0.643
0.663
w/o Validation Agent
0.749
0.650
0.715
0.681
0.562
0.581
0.510
0.543
MA-RCA (Ours)
0.958
0.960
0.944
0.952
0.843
0.827
0.830
0.828
underscoring the indispensability of specialized agents for
task decomposition. Without the Retrieval Agent’s semantic
grounding (w/o Retrieval Agent), performance plummets
further (F1: 0.295 on Nezha, 0.144 on Power), as the model
loses access to historical causal patterns, particularly in
Power’s hybrid ICT-electrical failures where cross-domain
symptom-cause mappings are sparse. Replacing hybrid
retrieval with keyword matching (w/o Semantic retrieval)
halves the F1 gap on Nezha (0.874 vs. 0.952) but cripples
Power (0.663 vs. 0.828), reﬂecting the latter’s reliance on
contextual nuance—electrical terms like “harmonic distor-
tion” resist keyword reduction, whereas cloud-native issues
like “API latency” tolerate partial lexical matches. Disabling
the Validation Agent (w/o Validation Agent) mimics clas-
sical RAG’s limitations, inﬂating false positives (Precision:
0.650 on Nezha, 0.581 on Power) due to unchecked LLM hal-
lucinations, especially in Power’s physics-driven scenarios
where hypotheses like “short-circuit” require tool-veriﬁed
metrics (e.g., voltage sag proﬁles) to avoid spurious correla-
tions.
ThePowerdataset’sstarksensitivitytocomponentremoval—
its F1 drops 72% without the Retrieval Agent versus Nezha’s
69%—highlights the compounded challenges of diagnosing
hybrid faults (e.g., memory leaks masquerading as voltage
sags). Here, semantic retrieval and multi-agent collaboration
are non-negotiable: the Validation Agent’s tool-in-the-loop
checks (e.g., querying harmonic distortion levels) suppress
misattributed root causes, while the Retrieval Agent’s causal
abstraction bridges ICT metrics (CPU throttling) and electri-
cal KPIs (capacitor aging). In contrast, Nezha’s cloud-centric
faults, while complex, beneﬁt from more self-contained
telemetry (traces, logs) that partially compensate for miss-
ing agents—explaining why w/o Semantic retrieval retains
87.4% F1 versus Power’s 66.3%. Notably, both datasets
suffer equally from monolithic LLM designs (w/o Multi-
agent), where fused task handling ampliﬁes error propa-
gation: Precision plunges to 0.774 on Nezha and 0.742 on
Power, as undivided LLMs conﬂate symptom interpretation
(e.g., misclassifying network latency as code defects) with-
out agent-driven validation or retrieval-augmented context.
These results cement MA-RCA’s architectural superiority.
Its multi-agent synergy – semantic retrieval for knowledge
grounding, validation for hypothesis pruning, and tool inte-
Table 5 Performance of different base LLMs on Power monitoring
dataset
LLM base
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
Qwen-QwQ
0.824
0.808
0.810
0.809
LLAMA3.3-70B
0.830
0.814
0.816
0.815
DeepSeek
0.835
0.819
0.821
0.820
QwenMax
0.843
0.827
0.830
0.828
gration for domain-speciﬁc veriﬁcation – proves vital in
both cloud and cyber-physical domains. The framework’s
resilience to single-symptom inputs (e.g., “API latency
>500ms” or “voltage sag detected”) stems from this layered
rigor: agents collaboratively disambiguate sparse signals,
whereas ablated variants regress to brittle heuristics.
Influence of base LLMs
Table 5 demonstrates that MA-RCA’s performance is con-
sistently robust across different base LLMs, yet subject to
model capability variations. QwenMax [26] achieves the
highest scores (Acc = 0.843, F1 = 0.828), reﬂecting its strong
reasoning and knowledge integration capacity. In contrast,
Qwen-QwQ [26], with lower results (Acc = 0.824, F1 =
0.809), highlights limitations in contextual understanding
or logical inference. Intermediate models like LLAMA3.3-
70B [7] and DeepSeek [14] exhibit scalable performance,
correlating with model scale and training data quality. These
results afﬁrm that MA-RCA’s multi-agent structure bene-
ﬁts effectively from enhanced base LLMs, while its design
mitigates inherent model weaknesses through structured col-
laboration and validation.
Influence of the number of historical cases
Table 6 demonstrates that the number of retrieved histori-
cal cases signiﬁcantly inﬂuences MA-RCA’s performance.
Accuracy and F1-score improve as cases increase from 1
to 5 (Acc: 0.798 →0.843, F1: 0.794 →0.828), indicating
enhanced hypothesis grounding through richer contextual
knowledge. However, further increasing to 10 or 20 cases
results in performance degradation (Acc: 0.835, 0.812; F1:
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 11 of 13
4
Table 6 Performance of
different number of historical
cases on Power monitoring
dataset
Retrieval cases
Acc
Pre
Rec
F1
1
0.798
0.783
0.805
0.794
3
0.826
0.812
0.831
0.821
5
0.843
0.827
0.830
0.828
10
0.835
0.818
0.822
0.820
20
0.812
0.796
0.804
0.800
Fig. 3 User interface of the
power metering system. The
proposed MA-RCA method is
integrated as a plug-in, referred
to as the “Diagnosis Agent” (On
the right side)
Fig. 4 Diagnosis Agent utilizes
historical cases and current KPI
data to analyze the root cause of
the user-described issue and
generate a corresponding report
0.820, 0.800), suggesting the introduction of irrelevant or
noisy instances that dilute diagnostic relevance. This non-
monotonic behavior underscores the importance of optimal
retrieval setting: too few cases limit knowledge utilization,
while too many introduce distraction, afﬁrming that precise
retrieval quantityis critical for balancinginformativeness and
focus in evidence-based RCA.
System illustration
To empirically validate the operational efﬁcacy of MA-RCA
in industrial scenarios, we developed an intelligent diagno-
sis system for real-world power metering infrastructures via
lightweight plugin integration. As shown in Fig. 3, the sys-
tem incorporates a “Diagnosis Agent” (on the right side) that
implements the multi-agent coordination framework intro-
ducedinSect.3.ThisagentservesasacognitiveaidforSREs,
allowing them to initiate diagnostic workﬂows by submitting
alert descriptions through a natural language interface.
Upon receiving an unstructured alert from the user
(Fig. 2a), the agent performs syntactic parsing and validates
the input against a predeﬁned incident schema, as detailed
in Sect.3.1.1. This ensures all essential diagnostic elements,
such as device type, device ID, timeframe, and symptom
descriptions, are correctly speciﬁed.
123

4
Page 12 of 13
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
The analytical process is illustrated in Fig. 4. Once the
input is validated, the RCA Agent orchestrates the Retrieval
Agent and Validation Agent to identify root causes. The
Retrieval Agent queries relevant historical cases using the
structured input. Multiple root-cause hypotheses are then
constructed. The Validation Agent correlates these with
real-time operational data using tool-enabled veriﬁcation to
identify the most probable cause. Finally, the Report Agent
generates a comprehensive diagnostic report.
Conclusions
In this paper, we presented MA-RCA, a novel multi-
agent collaborative framework designed to automate RCA
in complex distributed systems. Confronting the persistent
challenges of LLM hallucination and error propagation in
multi-step reasoning, MA-RCA decomposes the manual
RCA workﬂow into distinct subtasks managed by special-
ized agents. Its core innovations include a dedicated Retrieval
Agent that grounds the process in historical diagnostic
knowledge to expand the hypothesis space, and a Valida-
tion Agent that actively tests hypotheses against runtime
data to suppress hallucinations. Comprehensive evaluations
on cloud-native and power metering datasets demonstrate
that MA-RCA substantially outperforms strong baselines
including RAG, RCACOPILOT, and agent-based models,
achieving superior accuracy and robustness across diverse
operational environments.
Although MA-RCA demonstrates strong performance, it
still has certain limitations: (1) its effectiveness depends
heavily on the quality and comprehensiveness of the his-
torical case repository, as sparse or outdated data may
constrain the Retrieval Agent’s performance; (2) the data col-
lection and validation processes, while essential for accuracy,
introduce additional latency compared to direct inference
methods,whichcouldaffectusabilityinhighlytime-sensitive
scenarios. These limitations pave the way for concrete
future research directions. First, we will investigate adap-
tive retrieval mechanisms that can dynamically determine
the optimal number and relevance of historical cases based
on the anomaly’s context, moving beyond a static top-k strat-
egy to improve efﬁciency and accuracy. Second, to address
latency, we plan to explore speculative execution and pre-
fetching strategies for the agent team, where potential data
collection steps are anticipated and initiated in parallel to
streamline the diagnostic pipeline.
Author Contributions All authors contributed to the conception and
design of the study. Speciﬁcally: Feng Fu: Conceptualization, Method-
ology, Software development, Original draft preparation, Funding
acquisition, Supervision. Hong Ding: Data curation, Project adminis-
tration. Yong Qin: Validation, Formal analysis. Jian Yu: Writing-review
and editing. Dechao Xu: Supervision, Project administration. All
authors critically reviewed and approved the ﬁnal version of the
manuscript.
Funding This work was supported by the State Grid Electric Power
Research Institute Co., Ltd. under its 2024 Frontline Production-
Oriented Technology Project Package (Electric Power Consumption
Branch Company)–Research and Application of Key Technologies for
Enhancing Intelligent Capabilities in Metering Operations and Mainte-
nance (Project No. WBS 524609240180).
Data availability Nezha dataset [31] is open-sourced and availble
at https://github.com/IntelligentDDS/Nezha.The “Power monitoring”
dataset is collected with real-world power system and contains sensi-
tive information, which will be provided as request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest No Conﬂict of interest exists in the submission of
this manuscript.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed mate-
rial. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regula-
tion or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
1. Ahmed T, Ghosh S, Bansal C, Zimmermann T, Zhang X, Rajmohan
S (2023) Recommending root-cause and mitigation steps for cloud
incidents using large language models. In: 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th
international conference on software engineering (ICSE). IEEE, pp
1737–1749
2. Bin Y, Yang Y, Shen F, Xie N, Shen HT, Li X (2018) Describing
video with attention-based bidirectional lstm. IEEE Trans Cybern
49(7):2631–2641
3. Chen H, Chen P, Yu G, Li X, He Z (2024) Microﬁ: non-intrusive
and prioritized request-level fault injection for microservice appli-
cations. IEEE Trans Depend Secure Comput 21(5):4921–4938
4. Chen Y, Xie H, Ma M, Kang Y, Gao X, Shi L, Cao Y, Gao X,
Fan H, Wen M et al (2023) Empowering practical root cause anal-
ysis by large language models for cloud incidents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15778
5. Chen Z, Luo Y, Wang S, Li J, Huang Z (2022) GSMFlow: genera-
tion shifts mitigating ﬂow for generalized zero-shot learning. IEEE
Trans Multimed 25:5374–5385
6. Gao Y, Xiong Y, Gao X, Jia K, Pan J, Bi Y, Dai Y, Sun J, Wang H
(2023) Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models:
a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997
7. Grattaﬁori A, Dubey A, Jauhri A, Pandey A, Kadian A, Al-Dahle
A, Letman A, Mathur A, Schelten A, Vaughan A et al (2024) The
Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783
123

Complex & Intelligent Systems (2026) 12 :4
Page 13 of 13
4
8. Guo J, Guo S, Ma S, Sun Y, Xu Y (2021) Conservative novelty syn-
thesizing network for malware recognition in an open-set scenario.
IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 34(2):662–676
9. Guo X, Peng X, Wang H, Li W, Jiang H, Ding D, Xie T, Su L
(2020) Graph-based trace analysis for microservice architecture
understanding and problem diagnosis. In: Proceedings of the 28th
ACM joint meeting on European software engineering conference
and symposium on the foundations of software engineering, pp
1387–1397
10. Inam MA, Chen Y, Goyal A, Liu J, Mink J, Michael N, Gaur S,
Bates A, Hassan WU (2023) SoK: history is a vast early warning
system: auditing the provenance of system intrusions. In: 2023
IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE, pp 2620–
2638
11. Jia T, Yang L, Chen P, Li Y, Meng F, Xu J (2017) Logsed: anomaly
diagnosis through mining time-weighted control ﬂow graph in logs.
In: 2017 IEEE 10th international conference on cloud computing
(CLOUD). IEEE, pp 447–455
12. Larsson JE, DeBor J (2007) Real-time root cause analysis for com-
plex technical systems. In: 2007 IEEE 8th human factors and power
plants and HPRCT 13th annual meeting. IEEE, pp 156–163
13. Li H, Yang Z, Ma Y, Bin Y, Yang Y, Chua TS (2024) MM-Forecast:
a multimodal approach to temporal event forecasting with large
language models. In: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM international
conference on multimedia, pp 2776–2785
14. Liu A, Feng B, Xue B, Wang B, Wu B, Lu C, Zhao C, Deng C,
Zhang C, Ruan C et al (2024) Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.19437
15. Liu D, He C, Peng X, Lin F, Zhang C, Gong S, Li Z, Ou J, Wu Z
(2021) MicroHECL: high-efﬁcient root cause localization in large-
scalemicroservicesystems.In:2021IEEE/ACM43rdinternational
conference on software engineering: software engineering in prac-
tice (ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, pp 338–347
16. Liu P, Xu H, Ouyang Q, Jiao R, Chen Z, Zhang S, Yang J, Mo L,
Zeng J, Xue W et al (2020) Unsupervised detection of microservice
trace anomalies through service-level deep Bayesian networks. In:
2020 IEEE 31st international symposium on software reliability
engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, pp 48–58
17. Ma M, Zhang S, Pei D, Huang X, Dai H (2018) Robust and rapid
adaption for concept drift in software system anomaly detection.
In: 2018 IEEE 29th international symposium on software reliability
engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, pp 13–24
18. Ma Y, Xiao X, Wang Y (2020) Identifying the root cause of power
system disturbances based on waveform templates. Electr Power
Syst Res 180:106107
19. Nandi A, Mandal A, Atreja S, Dasgupta GB, Bhattacharya S (2016)
Anomaly detection using program control ﬂow graph mining from
execution logs. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD inter-
national conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp
215–224
20. Nedelkoski S, Cardoso J, Kao O (2019) Anomaly detection and
classiﬁcation using distributed tracing and deep learning. In: 2019
19th IEEE/ACM international symposium on cluster, cloud and
grid computing (CCGRID). IEEE, pp 241–250
21. Nguyen H, Shen Z, Tan Y, Gu X (2013) FChain: toward black-box
online fault localization for cloud systems. In: 2013 IEEE 33rd
international conference on distributed computing systems. IEEE,
pp 21–30
22. Ning L, Liang Z, Jiang Z, Qu H, Ding Y, Fan W, Wei XY, Lin S,
Liu H, Yu PS et al (2025) A survey of WebAgents: towards next-
generation AI agents for web automation with large foundation
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23350
23. Pourbeik P, Kundur PS, Taylor CW (2006) The anatomy of a power
grid blackout-root causes and dynamics of recent major blackouts.
IEEE Power Energy Mag 4(5):22–29
24. Roy D, Zhang X, Bhave R, Bansal C, Las-Casas P, Fonseca R,
Rajmohan S (2024) Exploring LLM-based agents for root cause
analysis. In: Companion proceedings of the 32nd ACM interna-
tional conference on the foundations of software engineering, pp
208–219
25. Shi W, Hu Z, Bin Y, Liu J, Yang Y, Ng SK, Bing L, Lee RKW
(2024) Math-LLaVA: bootstrapping mathematical reasoning for
multimodal large language models. In: Findings of the conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing, pp 4663–
4680
26. Team Q (2024) Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15115
27. Wang L, Zhao N, Chen J, Li P, Zhang W, Sui K (2020) Root-cause
metriclocationformicroservicesystemsvialoganomalydetection.
In: 2020 IEEE international conference on web services (ICWS).
IEEE, pp 142–150
28. Wang Z, Liu Z, Zhang Y, Zhong A, Wang J, Yin F, Fan L, Wu L,
Wen Q (2024) RCAgent: cloud root cause analysis by autonomous
agents with tool-augmented large language models. In: Proceed-
ings of the ACM international conference on information and
knowledge management, pp 4966–4974
29. Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D, Bosma M, Xia F, Chi E, Le QV,
Zhou D et al (2022) Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning
in large language models. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 35:24824–
24837
30. Wu L, Tordsson J, Elmroth E, Kao O (2020) MicroRCA: root cause
localization of performance issues in microservices. In: NOMS
2020-2020 IEEE/IFIP network operations and management sym-
posium. IEEE, pp 1–9
31. Yu G, Chen P, Li Y, Chen H, Li X, Zheng Z (2023) Nezha: inter-
pretable ﬁne-grained root causes analysis for microservices on
multi-modal observability data. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM
joint European software engineering conference and symposium
on the foundations of software engineering, pp 553–565
32. Zhang S, Jin P, Lin Z, Sun Y, Zhang B, Xia S, Li Z, Zhong Z, Ma M,
Jin W et al (2023) Robust failure diagnosis of microservice system
through multimodal data. IEEE Trans Serv Comput 16(6):3851–
3864
33. Zhang W, Guo H, Yang J, Tian Z, Zhang Y, Yan C, Li Z, Li T, Shi X,
Zheng L, Zhang B (2024) MABC: multi-agent blockchain-inspired
collaboration for root cause analysis in micro-services architecture.
In: Findings of the conference on empirical methods in natural
language processing, pp 4017–4033
34. Zhang X, Xu Y, Qin S, He S, Qiao B, Li Z, Zhang H, Li X, Dang
Y, Lin Q et al (2021) Onion: identifying incident-indicating logs
for cloud systems. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM joint meeting
on European software engineering conference and symposium on
the foundations of software engineering, pp 1253–1263
35. Zhang Y, Guan Z, Qian H, Xu L, Liu H, Wen Q, Sun L, Jiang J, Fan
L, Ke M (2021) CloudRCA: a root cause analysis framework for
cloud computing platforms. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM inter-
national conference on information & knowledge management, pp
4373–4382
36. Zhou X, Peng X, Xie T, Sun J, Ji C, Li W, Ding D (2018) Fault
analysis and debugging of microservice systems: industrial survey,
benchmark system, and empirical study. IEEE Trans Softw Eng
47(2):243–260
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123
